World Energy Outlook 2020World Energy Outlook 2020 www.iea.org/weoClassic Page 1.indd 1 21-10-2019 10:53:41 Classic Page 1_A4.indd 1 21-10-2019 10:55:38The IEA examines the full spectrum of energy issues including oil, gas and coal supply and demand, renewable energy technologies, electricity markets, energy efficiency, access to energy, demand side management and much more.
Through its work, the IEA advocates policies that will enhance the reliability, affordability and sustainability of energy in its 30 member countries, 8 association countries and beyond.
Please note that this publication is subject to specific restrictions that limit its use and distribution.
The terms and conditions are available online at www.iea.org/t&c/ Source: IEA.
All rights reserved.International Energy Agency Website: www.iea.orgIEA member countries: Australia Austria BelgiumCanadaCzech Republic DenmarkEstoniaFinland France Germany Greece HungaryIreland ItalyJapanKorea Luxembourg Mexico Netherlands New Zealand NorwayPoland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom United States The European Commission also participates in the work of the IEAIEA association countries: Brazil ChinaIndiaIndonesiaMoroccoSingaporeSouth AfricaThailand INTERNATIONAL ENERGYAGENCY Foreword 3 Foreword This has been an extraordinarily turbulent year for the global energy system.
Covid -19 unleashed a crisis of exceptional ferocity on countries around the world, with severe impacts on lives and livelihoods.
The crisis is still unfolding today – and its consequences for the world's energy future remain highly uncertain.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) responded quickly and assertively to the pandemic, refocusing our work to assess the impacts of the crisis across all the key fuels and technologies.
We enabled governments, companies and citizens to better understand the emerging trends, such as the unparalleled plunge in global energy investment and its consequences.
We offered practical policy advice, most notably in the WEO Special Report on Sustainable Recovery , which shows how governments – by implementing targeted energy policies – can boost economic growth, create jobs and put global emissions into decline over the next three years.
Following that, we drew on the IEA's ever -growing convening power to bring together 40 Ministers from countries representing over 80% of the global economy at the IEA Clean Energy Transitions Summit on 9 July 2020, where they discussed the importance of a clean and resilient recovery.
The work of the IEA remains centred on the range of energy challenges the world face s today – and on how the pandemic is affecting them.
We are contending with old and new threats, both to the energy supplies that economies and societies rely on today – and to the all -important clean energy transitions that will shape their future.
Our fl agship publication, the World Energy Outlook (WEO) , is no exception.
This year's WEO has adapted to the pandemic's disruption in t hree key ways.
First, Covid -19 has introduced huge near- term uncertainty about the future of energy, so WEO -2020 focus es much more than its predecessors on the next 10 years.
We are entering a critical decade for accelerating clean energy transitions and putting emissions into structural decline.
Second, a k ey question is the future severity of the pandemic and its economic implications .
In response, we have i ntroduced a new scenario, the Delayed Recovery Scenario, to explore this and c onsider the different outcomes, depending on whether the world gets the p andemic under control in 2021 or it turns into a more prolonged crisis and a deeper economic slump.
This has h uge implications for the energy sector, especially in the developing world.
A delayed economic recovery results in slower emissions growth, but it is not an answer to climate change.
Our analysis makes it clear that the somewhat lower emissions come for all the wrong reasons and at huge economic and social costs.
Third, the rising number of countries and companies committing to net -zero emissions is a profoundly important development.
All the pledges announced so far are in line with the vision mapped out in our Sustainable Development Scenario, in which countries achieving net-zero emissions by 2050 spur the world as a whole to reach it by 2070 .
But when I sat down at the beginning of this year with the lead authors of t he WEO , Laura Cozzi and Tim Gould , we agreed it was time to deepen and extend our analysis of net -zero emissions.
4 World Energy O utlook 2020 That is why we have a new case in this WEO : the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 c ase, which examines what it would take to get the entire world to net zero by mid -century.
How the world rises to these challenges will define our energy future and determine the success or failure of efforts to tackle climate change.
The IEA has made its own position clear.
Since the scale of the Covid -19 crisis began t o emerge, we have been leading the calls to put clean energy at the heart of the economic response to ensure a secure and sustainable recovery.
Today, we are seeing optimistic signs that clean energy transitions are gaining momentum.
In this WEO , we highli ght the enormously consequential nature of the choices and responsibilities facing decision makers.
The massive sums of money they are committing to spur economic recovery are a historic opportunity to significantly accelerate transitions towards a cleaner and more resilient energy future.
This is the moment for ambitious action.
As this WEO makes clear , decisions taken now will echo down through generations to come.
I would like to conclude by noting that the essential insights contained in this publicatio n are the result of a tremendous amount of painstaking number crunching, shrewd analysis and commendable hard work from the entire WEO team .
I would like to thank all of those colleagues, under the exemplary leadership of Laura and Tim, for their dedicated efforts.
Dr. Fatih Birol Executive Director International Energy Agenc y IEA.
Acknowledgements 5 Acknowledgements This study was prepared by the World Energy Outlook (WEO) team in the Directorate of Sustainability, Technology and Outlooks (STO) in co -operation with other directorates and offices of the International Energy Agency.
The study was designed and directed b y Laura Cozzi, Chief Energy Modeller and Head of Division for Energy Demand Outlook, and Tim Gould , Head of Division for Energy Supply and Investment Outlook s. Stéphanie Bouckaert led on end-use modelling and analysis .
Daniel Crow co-led the climate and en vironment analysis and led the behaviour analysis.
Tae -Yoon Kim co-led the fuel supply analysis .
Christophe McGlade co-led the climate and environment analysis, and the analysis of fuel supply.
Paweł Olejarnik co-ordinated the oil, natural gas and coal supply modelling.
Brent Wanner led the power sector modelling and analysis.
Daniel Wetzel coled the energy demand analysis.
Key contributions from across the WEO team were from: Zakia Adam (lead on data management, contributed to fossil fuel subsidies), Lucila Arboleya Sarazola ( investment and finance ), Yasmine Arsalane (lead economic outlook , power), Simon Bennett ( energy technology ), Arthur Contejean ( lead on energy access and developing countries ), Davide D'Ambrosio (lead on data science, power ), Amrita Dasgupta (energy access, climate and environment ), Thibault Deletombe (industry) , John Connor Donovan ( power and data management ), Musa Erdogan ( industry and data management ), Eric Fabozzi (power and electricity networks ), Pablo Gonzalez ( investment and f inance ), Timothy Goodson ( lead on buildings and demand -side response ), Paul Hugues (industry and transport ), Vanessa Koh (power and energy storage ), Lilly Yejin Lee (transport and aviation ), Kieran McNamara (electricity networks and nuclear), Laura Maiolo (oil and gas supply ), Ariane Millot (buildings , climate and environment ), Toru Muta (fuel supply ), Yoko Nobuoka (investment, coal), Sebastian Papapanagiotou ( electricity networks and power ), Claudia Pavarini ( lead on energy storage, power), Daniele Perugia (financing of solar PV and electricity networks) , Apostolos Petropoulos (lead on transport , climate and environment ), Ryszard Pospiech (supply modelling and data management ), Arnaud Rouget ( energy access and Africa ), Jasmine Samantar (energy access and Africa ), Andreas Schroeder (lead on industry ), Rebecca Schulz ( oil and gas supply ), Leonie Staas (climate and environment), Michael Waldron ( lead on investment ), Molly A. Walton (fuel supply ), Peter Zeniewski (lead on natural gas) .
Teresa Coon, Marina Dos Santos and Eleni Tsoukala p rovided essential support.
Edmund Hosker carried editorial responsibility.
Debra Justus was the copy -editor.
Colleagues from the Energy Technology Policy (ETP) Division led by Timur Gül provided valuable help on demand modelling and analysis, with overall guidance from Araceli Fernandez Pales.
Peter Levi, Hana Mandova and Tiffany Vass contributed to the analysis on industry; Leonardo Paoli, Jacopo Tattini and Jacob Teter contributed to the analysis on transport; Thibaut Abergel and Chiara Delmastro contributed to the analysis on buildings; Jose Bermudez Menendez and Uwe Remme contributed to the analysis on power and IEA.
6 World Energy Outlook 2020 hydrogen.
Other key contributors from across the agency were: Laszlo Varro, Carlos Fernández Alvarez , Heymi Bahar, Tomas De Oliveira Bredariol and Inchan Hwang .
Mechthild Wörsdörfer, Director of STO, provided encouragement and support throughout the project.
Valuable comments and feedback were provided by other senior management and numerous other colleagues within the IEA.
In particular, David Turk , Keisuke Sadamori, Amos Bromhead, Alessandro Blasi, Nick Johnstone, Neil Atkinson, Joel Couse, Peter Fraser, Paolo Frankl, Tom Howes, Brian Motherway, Aad van Bohemen, Rebecca Gaghen, Masatoshi Sugiura, Christophe Barret, Toril Bosoni and Jean -Baptiste Dubreuil .
Thanks go to the IEA's Communication and Digitalisation Office for their help in producing the report and website materials, particularly to Jad Mouawad, Jeth ro Mullen, Astrid Dumond, Jon Custer, Christopher Gully, Katie Lazaro, Julie Puech, Magdalena Sanocka, Rob Stone and Therese Walsh.
Diana Browne , Ivo Letra and Ben McCulloch provided essential support to the production process.
IEA 's Office of the Legal Counsel, Office of Management and Administration and Energy Data Centre provided assistance throughout the preparation of the report.
The IEA is grateful for the guidance and valuable advice of Peter Betts on climate issues.
Valuable input to the analysis was provided by: David Wilkinson (independent consultant); Markus Amann, Peter Rafaj, Gregor Kiesewetter, Wolfgang Schöpp, Chris Heyes, Zbigniew Klimont, Jens Borken -Kleefeld and Pallav Purohit (International Institute for Ap plied Systems Analysis); Elisa Puzzolo, Daniel Pop e and Matthew Shupler ( University of Liverpool) .
The work could not have been achieved without the support and co -operation provided by many government bodies, organisations and companies worldwide, notably : Enel; Energy Market Authority, Singapore; Eni; European Commission; Ministry of the Environment, Land and Sea, Italy; Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan; The Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth, Japan; and Toshiba.
Activities within the IEA Clean Energy Technologies Programme provided valuable support to this report.
Thanks also go to the IEA Energy Business Council, IEA Coal Industry Advisory Board, IEA Energy Efficiency Industry Advisory Board and the IEA Renewable Industry Advisory Board.
Peer reviewers Many senior government officials and international experts provided input and reviewed preliminary drafts of the report.
Their comments and suggestions were of great value.
They include: Emmanuel Ackom UN Environment Programme (UNEP), Technical University of Denmark Partnership (DTU) Keigo Akimoto The Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth, Japan IEA.
Acknowledgements 7 Venkatachalam Anbumozhi Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) Peter Bach Danish Energy Agency Marco Baroni Independent consultant Paul Baruya Clean Coal Centre Tom Bastin UK Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Harmeet Bawa Hitachi ABB Power Grids Christian Besson Independent consultant Rina Bohle Zeller Vestas, Denmark Serge Braz EDF William Brent Power for All Mick Buffier Glencore Nick Butler Kings College London Guy Caruso Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) , United States Kimball Chen Global LPG Partnership Xavier Chen Statoil China Drew Clarke Australian Energy Market Operator Russel Conklin US Department of Energy Ian Cronshaw Independent consultant Franç ois Dassa EDF Ralf Dickel Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, United Kingdom Giles Dickson WindEurope Loic Douillet GE Power David Elzinga Asian Development Bank Simon Evans Carbon Brief Fridtjof Fossum Unander Research Council of Norway Jean -François Gagné Department of Natural Resources Canada Faith Gan Energy Market Authority, Singapore Karthik Ganesan Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW) Dolf Gielen International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) Craig Glazer PJM Interconnection Andrii Gritsevskyi International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Andrea Guerrero United Nations Michael Hackethal Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy , Germany James Henderson Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, United Kingdom Cameron Hepburn Oxford University, United Kingdom Masazumi Hirono Tokyo Gas Takashi Hongo Mitsui Global Strategic Studies Institute, Japan Jan-Hein Jesse JOSCO Energy Finance and Strategy Consultancy Noah Kaufman Columbia University, United States IEA.
8 World Energy Outlook 2020 Yoichi Kaya The Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth, Japan Michael Kelly World LPG Association Robert Kleinberg Columbia University, United States Hidechika K oizumi Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan Phoebe Koundouri Athens University of Economics and Business Ken Koyama Institute of Energy Economics, Japan Atsuhito Kurozumi Kyoto University of Foreign Studies Sarah Ladislaw Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), United States Francisco Laveron Iberdrola Lee Levkowitz BHP Li Jiangtao State Grid Energy Research Institute, China Felix Chr.
Matthes Öko-Institut – Institute for Applied Ecology, Germany Antonio Merino Garcia Repsol Cristobal Miller Department of Natural Resources, Canada Simone Mori Enel.
Peter Morris Minerals Council of Australia Isabel Murray Department of Natural Resources, Canada Steve Nadel American Council for an Energy -Efficient Economy, United States Henri Paillere International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Pak Yongduk Korea Energy Economics Institute (KEEI) Ignacio Perez Arriaga Comillas Pontifical University's Institute for Research in Technology, Spain Glen Peters CICERO Koen Peters GOGLA (Global association for the off - grid solar energy industry) Stephanie Pfeifer The Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change (IIGCC) Cedric Philibert French Institute of International Relations , Cent re for Energy & Climate Dmitry Popov CRU Andreas Regnell Vattenfall Rasmus Nicolas Ringgaard Permanen t Delegation of Denmark to the O ECD Seth Roberts Saudi Aramco Vera Rodenhoff Federal Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety, Germany Hans -Wilhelm Schiffer World Energy Council Filip Schittecatte ExxonMobil Adnan Shihab Eldin Foundation for the Advancement of Sciences, Kuwait Adam Sieminski Kapsarc Paul Simons Yale University Stephan Singer Climate Action Network International IEA.
Acknowledgements 9 Jim Skea Imperial College London John Staub US Energy Information Administration Ottavia Stella Eni Jonathan Stern Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, United Kingdom Wim Thomas Royal Dutch Shell Johannes Trüby Deloitte Nikos Tsafos Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) , United States Frank van der Vleuten Ministry of Foreign Affairs, The Netherlands Noé Van Hulst Ministry of Economic Affairs & Climate Policy, The Netherlands Tom Van Ierland DG Climate Action, European Commission Frank Verrastro Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) , United States David Victor UC San Diego School of Global Policy and Strategy, United States Akira Yabumoto J-Power William Zimmern BP Christian Zinglersen European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER ) The individuals and organisations that contributed to this study are not responsible for any opinions or judgments it contains.
All errors and omissions are solely the responsibility of the IEA.
This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
All rights reserved.TABLE OF CONTENTS IEA.
All rights reserved.PART A: OVERVIEW AND INTRODUCTION Overview and key findings An energy world in lockdown PART B: SCENARIOS SUSTAINABLE RECOVERY Building on a sustainable recoveryAchieving net-zero emissions by 2050 AN UNCERTAIN RETURN Outlook for energy demandOutlook for electricityOutlook for fuel supply A LONGER PANDEMIC A delayed recovery2759 87 123 163 213253 295 ANNEXES IEA.
12 World Energy O utlook 2020 Foreword 3 Acknowledgements 5 Executive summary 17 Part A: Overview and Introduction 25 Overview and key findings 27 Introduction 29 Impacts of Covid -19 on the energy outlook 30 1.1 The pandemic is far from over and many uncertainties remain 30 1.2 Today's policy settings do not produce a decisive break in the outlook for CO 2 emissions, but a more sustainable recovery is possible 32 1.3 Renewables are taking power and solar is the new king 34 1.4 Modern societies are becoming ever more reliant on electricity, but weak grids could prove to be an Achilles heel 36 1.5 The pandemic could trigger lasting changes in consumer behaviour, but these would not transform the oil market on their own 37 1.6 Lower fuel prices are a mixed blessing for energy security and sustainability 38 1.7 This is a crisis that penalises the most vulnerable 40 1.8 Covid -19 sharpens the dilemmas facing the oil and gas industry 42 Prospects for clean energy tra nsitions 43 1.9 Enhanced clean energy policies and investments can make 2019 the peak year for energy -related emissions 44 1.10 Today's energy infrastructure, if operated as per past practices, would lock in a temperature rise of 1.65 °C 45 1.11 Within ten years, in the SDS, the drop in air pollutants would produce significantly cleaner air than experienced during the 2020 lockdowns 46 1.12 Gases – of different sorts – are pivotal to different stages of energy transitions, but are still in search of clear roles and business models 47 1.13 Transitions depend on government actions, but more than 70% of related investments c ould come from private actors 51 1.14 Net-zero pledges for 2050 and earlier are already essential to the SDS; achieving global net -zero by 2050 would require a dramatic extra push 53 1.15 Behavioural changes are essential to achieve the scale and speed of emissions reductions required in the NZE2050 55 1.16 If energy transitions are not secure, then they will not be rapid either 56 1 IEA.
All rights reserved.Table of Contents 13 An energy world in lockdown 59 2.1 Overview 61 2.2 Energy and Covid -19 pandemic 61 2.2.1 I mpacts by fuel and technology 66 2.3 Which way from here?
72 2.3.1 New questions and uncertainties 72 2.3.2 Designing the scenarios 76 Part B: Scenarios – Sustainabl e recovery 85 Building on a sustainable recovery 87 3.1 Introduction 89 3.1.1 How has Covid -19 affected the Sustainable Development Scenario?
89 3.2 Energy access 91 3.2.1 Impacts of the pandemic 92 3.2.2 A pathway to universal energy access by 2030 96 3.3 Air pollution 98 3.3.1 Impacts of the pandemic 98 3.3.2 A pathway to cleaner air by 2030 99 3.4 Greenhouse gas emissions 101 3.4.1 Impacts of the pandemic 101 3.4.2 CO 2 emissions from existing energy infrastructure 102 3.4.3 Energy sector trans formation to 2030 104 3.4.4 Investment and finance 115 3.4.5 Trends after 2030 121 Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 123 4.1 Introduction 125 4.2 A pathway towards global net -zero emissions in 2050 126 4.2.1 Primary energy demand and total final consumption 127 4.2.2 Electricity supply 132 4.2.3 Industry 136 4.2.4 Transport 138 4.2.5 Buildings 139 4.3 Role of behaviour changes in the NZE2050 142 4.3.1 CO 2 emissions savings from behaviour changes in the NZE2050 143 4.3.2 Further details on behaviour changes 146 2 3 4 IEA.
All rights reserved.14 World Energy O utlook 2020 4.4 Lessons from countries with zero emissions targets 152 4.4.1 Net-zero emissions in the European Union in the SDS 156 4.4.2 Lessons for policy makers and industry 159 4.5 Conclusions 160 Part B: Scenarios – An uncertain return 163 Outlook for energy demand 163 5.1 Overview 165 5.1.1 Uneven rebound to 2030 165 5.1.2 Beyond 2030 173 5.2 Oil 177 5.2.1 Overview of oil demand trends 177 5.2.2 Oil demand by sector 180 5.3 Natural gas 187 5.3.1 Overview of natural gas demand trends 187 5.4 Coal 195 5.4.1 Overview of coal demand trends 195 5.5 Nuclear 199 5.6 Renewables 199 5.6.1 Renewables demand by sector 202 5.7 Energy efficiency 206 5.7.1 Energy efficiency by sector 208 Outlook for electricity 213 6.1 Introduction 215 6.2 Outlook for electricity demand 216 6.2.1 Overview 216 6.2.2 Electricity demand by sector 217 6.2.3 Electricity demand by region 219 6.3 Outlook for electricity supply 222 6.3.1 Overview 222 6.3.2 Renewables 227 6.3.3 Coal -fired power 229 6.3.4 Natural gas-fired power 232 6.3.5 Nuclear power 232 6.3.6 Focus on financing costs for utility -scale solar PV 234 6.4 Outlook for flexibility 241 6.4.1 Electricity networks 242 5 6 IEA.
Table of Contents 15 6.4.2 Energy storage 246 6.4.3 Demand -side response 248 6.5 Implications for sustainabi lity 249 6.5.1 CO 2 and pollutant emissions 249 6.5.2 Electricity access 250 Outlook for fuel supply 253 7.1 Introduction 255 7.2 Oil supply 258 7.2.1 Upstream 258 7.2.2 Refining 267 7.3 Natural gas supply 270 7.4 Coal supply 279 7.5 Other fuels 285 7.5.1 Modern use of solid biomass 285 7.5.2 Liquid biofuels 286 7.5.3 Biogas and biomethane 287 7.5.4 Nuclear fuels 289 7.5.5 Low-carbon hydrogen 289 Part B: S cenarios – A longer pandemic 295 A delayed recovery 295 8.1 Introduction 297 8.1.1 A delayed recovery to 2030 299 8.1.2 Longer term outlook 300 8.2 Impacts of a Delayed Recovery Scenario 302 8.2.1 Oil 302 8.2.2 Electricity 305 8.2.3 Natural gas 311 8.2.4 Coal 313 8.2.5 Renewables 315 8.2.6 Nuclear 316 8.2.7 Efficiency 317 8.3 Implication s of a Delayed Recovery Scenario 318 8.3.1 Energy security 318 8.3.2 Emissions 321 8.3.3 Inequality and energy access 323 8.3.4 Investment 324 8.3.5 Innovation 328 8 7 IEA.
16 World Energy O utlook 2020 Annexes 331 Annex A .
Tables for scenario projections 333 Annex B .
Design of the scenarios 415 Annex C. Definitions 429 Annex D. References 443 Annex E. Inputs to the World Energy Model 457 IEA.
Executive Summary 17 Executive Summary The Covid- 19 pandemic has caused more disruption to the energy sector than any other event in recent history, leaving impacts that will be felt for years to come.
This IEA World Energy Outlook (WEO) examines in detail the effects of the pandemic, and in particular how it affects the prospects for rapid clean energy transitions.
It is too soon to say whether today's crisis represents a setback for efforts to bring about a more secure and sustainable energy system, or a catalyst that accelerates the pace of change.
The pandemic is far from over, many uncertainties remain and crucial energy policy decisions have yet to be made.
This Outlook explores different pathways out of the Covid- 19 cr isis, with a particular focus on a pivotal next ten years to 2030 .
At this hugely consequential moment for the energy sector and for the urgent global response to climate change, the WEO -2020 illustrates the historic nature of the choices, opportunities an d pitfalls that will shape where we go from here.
A huge shock to the system Our assessment is that global energy demand is set to drop by 5% in 2020, energy -related CO 2 emissions by 7% , and energy investment by 18% .
The estimate d falls of 8% in oil demand and 7% in coal use stand in sharp contrast to a slight rise in the contribution of renewables.
The reduction in natural gas demand is around 3%, while global electricity demand looks set to be down by a relatively modest 2% for the year.
4 gigatonnes (Gt) decline takes annual CO 2 emissions back to where they were a decade ago.
However, the initial signs are that there may not have been a similar fall in 2020 in emissions of methane – a powerful greenhouse gas – from the energy sector, despite lower oil and gas output.
There is no single storyline about the future Uncertainty over the duration of the pandemic, its economic and social impacts, and the policy responses open up a wide range of possible energy futures.
By considering different assumptions about these key unknowns, along with the latest energy market data and a dynamic representation of energy technologies, this Outlook examines:  The Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS), in which Covid -19 is gradually brought under control in 2021 and the global economy returns to pre -crisis levels the same year.
This scenario reflects all of today's announced policy intentions and targets, insofar as they are backed up by detailed measures for their realisation.
 The Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS) is designed with the same policy assumptions as in the STEPS, but a prolonged pandemic causes lasting damage to economic prospects.
The global economy returns to its pre -crisis size only in 2023, and the pandemic ushers in a decade with the lowest rate of energy demand growth since the 1930s.
 In the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS), a surge in clean energy policies and investment puts the energy system on track to achieve sustainable energy objectives in full, including the Paris Agreeme nt, energy access and air quality goals.
The assumptions on public health and the economy are the same as in the STEPS.
18 World Energy Outlook 20 20  The new Net Zero Emissions by 2050 case (NZE2050) extends the SDS analysis.
A rising number of countries and companies are targeting net -zero emissions, typically by midcentury.
All of these are achieved in the SDS, putting global emissions on track for net zero by 2070.
The NZE2050 includes the first detailed IEA modelling of what would be needed in the next ten years to put global CO 2 emissions on track for net zero by 2050.
The shadow of the pandemic looms large Global energy demand rebounds to its pre -crisis level in early 2023 in the STEPS, but this is delayed until 2025 in the event of a prolonged pandemic and deeper slump, as in the DRS.
Prior to the crisis, energy demand was projected to grow by 12% between 2019 and 2030.
Growth over this period is now 9% in the STEPS, and only 4% in the DRS.
With demand in advanced economies on a declining trend, all of the increase comes from emer ging market and developing economies, led by India.
The slower pace of energy demand growth puts downward pressure on oil and gas prices compared with pre -crisis trajectories, although the large falls in investment in 2020 also increase the possibility of future market volatility.
Lower growth in incomes cuts into construction activities and reduces purchases of new appliances and cars, with the effects on livelihoods concentrated in developing economies.
In the DRS, residential floor space is 5% lower by 2 040, 150 million fewer refrigerators are in use, and there are 50 million fewer cars on the road than in the STEPS.
The worst effects are felt among the most vulnerable Reversing several years of progress, our analysis shows that the number of people without access to electricity in sub- Saharan Africa is set to rise in 2020.
Around 580 million people in sub -Saharan Africa lacked access to electricity in 2019, three -quarters of the global total, and some of the impetus behind efforts to improve this situation has been lost.
Governments are attending to the immediate public health and economic crisis, utilities and other entities that deliver access face serious financial strains, and borrowing costs have risen significantly in countries where the access deficit is high.
Regaining momentum on this issue is particularly challenging in the DRS.
In addition, we estimate that a rise in poverty levels worldwide may have made basic electricity services unaffordable for more than 100 million people who already had electricity connections, pushing these households back to relying on more polluting and inefficient sources of energy.
Solar becomes the new king of electricity… Renewables grow rapidly in all our scenarios, with solar at the centre of this new constellation of electricity generation technologies.
Supportive policies and maturing technologies are enabling very cheap access to capital in leading markets.
With sharp cost reduc tions over the past decade, solar PV is consistently cheaper than new coal - or gasfired power plants in most countries, and solar projects now offer some of the lowest cost electricity ever seen.
In the STEPS, renewables meet 80% of the growth in global electricity demand to 20 30.
Hydropower remains the largest renewable source of electricity, but solar is the main driver of growth as it sets new records for deployment each year after 2022 , IEA.
Executive Summary 19 followed by onshore and offshore wind.
The advance of renewable sources of generation, and of solar in particular, as well as the contribution of nuclear power , is much stronger in the SDS and NZE2050.
The pace of change in the electricity sector puts an additional premium on robust grids and other sources of flexibili ty, as well as reliable supplies of the critical minerals and metals that are vital to its secure transformation.
Storage plays an increasingly vital role in ensuring the flexible operation of power systems, with India becoming the largest market for utili ty-scale battery storage.
…but the downturn creates risks for the backbone of today's power systems Electricity grids could prove to be the weak link in the transformation of the power sector, with implications for the reliability and security of electricity supply.
The projected requirement for new transmission and distribution lines worldwide in the STEPS is 80% greater over the next decade than the expansion seen over the last ten years.
The importance of electricity networks rises even more in faster energy transitions.
However, the financial health of many utilities, especially in developing economies, has worsened as a result of the crisis.
There is a disparity in many countries between the spending required for smart, digital and flexible electricity networks and the revenues available to grid operators, creating a risk to the adequacy of investment under today's regulatory structures.
Covid -19 has catalysed a structural fall in global coal demand… Coal demand does not return to pre -crisis levels in the STEPS and its share in the 2040 energy mix falls below 20% for the first time since the I ndustrial Revolution .
Coal use for power generation is heavily affected by downward revisions in electricity demand and its use in industry is tempered by lower econ omic activity.
Coal phase -out policies, the rise of renewables and competition from natural gas lead to the retirement of 275 gigawatts (GW) of coal -fired capacity worldwide by 2025 (13% of the 2019 total), including 100 GW in the United States and 75 GW i n the European Union.
Projected increases in coal demand in developing economies in Asia are markedly lower than in previous WEOs , and not enough to offset falls elsewhere.
The share of coal in the global power generation mix falls from 37% in 2019 to 28% in 2030 in the STEPS, and to 15% by then in the SDS.
…but without an additional policy push, it is too soon to see a rapid decline of oil The era of growth in global oil demand comes to an end within ten years, but the shape of the economic recovery is a key uncertainty.
In both the STEPS and the DRS, oil demand flattens out in the 2030s.
However, a prolonged economic downturn knocks more than 4 million barrels per day (mb/d) off oil demand in the DRS, compared with the STEPS, keeping it below 100 mb/d .
Cha nges in behaviour resulting from the pandemic cut both ways.
The longer the disruption, the more some changes that eat into oil consumption become engrained, such as working from home or avoiding air travel.
However, not all the shifts in consumer behaviour disadvantage oil.
It benefits from a near- term aversion to public transport, the continued popularity of SUVs and the delayed replacement of older, inefficient vehicles.
20 World Energy Outlook 20 20 In the absence of a larger shift in policies, it is still too early to foresee a rapid decline in oil demand.
Rising incomes in emerging market and developing economies create strong underlying demand for mobility, offsetting reductions in oil use elsewhere.
But transport fuels are no longer a reliable engine for growth.
Oil use for passenger cars peaks in both the STEPS and the DRS, brought lower by continued improvements in fuel efficiency and robust growth in sales of electric cars.
Oil use for longer -distance freight and shipping varies according to the outlook for the global economy and international trade.
Upward pressure on oil demand increasingly depends on its rising use as a feedstock in the petrochemical sector.
Despite an anticipated rise in recycling rates, there is still plenty of scope for demand for plastics to rise, especia lly in developing economies.
However, since oil used to make plastics is not combusted, our scenarios see a peak in total oil -related CO 2 emissions.
Looking beyond the glut: long- term policy questions for natural gas Natural gas fares better than other fossil fuels , but different policy contexts produce strong variations.
In the STEPS, a 30% rise in global natural gas demand by 2040 is concentrated in South and East Asia.
Policy priorities in these regions – notably a push to improve air quality and to support growth in manufacturing – combine with lower prices to underpin the expansion of gas infrastructure.
By contrast, this is the first WEO in which the STEPS projections show gas demand in advanced economies going into slight decline by 2040 .
An uncertai n economic recovery also raise s questions about the future prospects of the record amount of new liquefied natural gas export facilities approved in 2019.
Greater transparency on methane emissions seems to be on the way, with implications for the environmental credentials of different sources of gas .
In carbon -intensive economies, natural gas continues to benefit from lower emissions, compared with coal.
However, this is less of an asset in countries planning a pathway to net -zero emissions, where coal is often already in decline.
Methane emissions along gas supply chains – as highlighted in the IEA's Methane Tracker – remain a crucial uncertainty, although better data from companies and from aerial measurements, including from satellites, should soon impro ve understanding of the sources of leaks from across the energy sector.
In Europe in the STEPS, and in all parts of the world in the SDS, the challenge for the gas industry is to retool itself for a different energy future.
This can come via demonstrable p rogress with methane abatement, via alternative gases such as biomethane and low -carbon hydrogen, and technologies like carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS).
Major dilemmas facing oil and gas producers, and risks to investment Lower prices and downward revisions to demand, resulting from the pandemic, have cut around one -quarter off the value of future oil and gas production.
Many oil and gas producers, notably those in the Middle East and Africa such as Iraq and Nigeria, are facing acute fiscal p ressures as a result of high reliance on hydrocarbon revenues.
Now, more than ever, fundamental efforts to diversify and reform the economies of some major oil and gas exporters look unavoidable.
The US shale industry has met nearly 60% of the increase in global oil and gas demand over the last ten years, but this rise was fuelled by easy credit that has now dried up.
So far in 2020, leading oil and gas companies have IEA.
Executive Summary 21 reduced the reported worth of their assets by more than $50 billion, a palpable expression of a shift in perceptions about the future.
Investment in oil and gas supply has fallen by one-third compared with 2019, and the extent and timing of any pick -up in spending is unclear.
So too is the ability of the industry to meet it in a timely way: this could presage new price cycles and risks to energy security.
Low -cost resources, low emissions and diversification are becoming the strategic watchwords for many producer economies and for oil and gas companies.
Declines in production from existing fields create a need for new upstream projects, even in rapid energy transitions.
However, investors are looking with increased scepticism at oil and gas projects d ue to concerns about financial performance and the compatibility of company strategies with environmental goals.
Some of the financial concerns might ease if prices pick up and projects start to offer better returns, but questions about the industry's cont ribution to reducing emissions are not going to go away.
As things stand, the world is not set for a decisive downward turn in emissions… Global emissions are set to bounce back more slowly than after the financial crisis of 2008- 2009, but the world is still a long way from a sustainable recovery.
CO 2 emissions in the STEPS edge above 2019 levels on their way to 36 Gt in 2030.
Emissions are lower in the event of a delayed recovery, but a weaker economy also drains momentum from the process of change in the energy sector.
Lower fuel prices, compared with pre -crisis trajectories, mean that payback periods for efficiency investments are extended, slowing the rate of global efficiency improvement.
The pandemic and its aftermath can suppress emissions, but low ec onomic growth is not a low -emissions strategy.
Only an acceleration in structural changes to the way the world produces and consumes energy can break the emissions trend for good.
…but there are much more sustainable pathways out of the crisis… A step- chan ge in clean energy investment, in line with the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan, offers a way to boost economic recovery, create jobs and reduce emissions .
This approach has not featured prominently in the plans proposed to date, except in the European Union , the United Kingdom, Canada, Korea, New Zealand and a handful of other countries.
In the SDS, full implementation of the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan, published in June 2020 in co-operation with the International Monetary Fund, puts the global energy eco nomy on a different post -crisis track.
Additional investment of $1 trillion a year between 2021 and 2023 in the SDS is directed towards improvements in efficiency, low -emissions power and electricity grids, and more sustainable fuels.
This makes 2019 the definitive peak for global CO 2 emissions.
By 2030, emissions in the SDS are nearly 10 Gt lower than in the STEPS.
…that also bring cleaner air than during the 2020 lockdowns Cities see major improvements in air quality by 2030 in the SDS, but without the disruptions to economic activity or people's lives that cleared the air in 2020 .
Over the next ten years, lower emissions from urban power plants, residential heating units and IEA.
22 World Energy Outlook 20 20 industrial facilities in the SDS lead to falls of 45- 65% in concentrations of fine particulate matter in cities, and cleaner transportation also brings down other street -level pollutants.
Major reductions in indoor pollution in developing economies also come from improved access to clean cooking.
The SDS does not eliminate all sources of air pollution entirely, but while the toll of premature deaths from poor air quality continues to rise in the STEPS, the SDS would avoid more than 12 million premature deaths over the next decade.
Avoiding new emissions is not enough: if nothing is done about emissions from existing infrastructure, climate goals are surely out of reach Detailed new analysis shows that, if today's energy infrastructure continues to operate as it has in the past, it would lock in by itself a temperature rise of 1.65 °C.
All of today's power plants, industrial plants, buildings and vehicles will generate a certain level of future emissions if they continue to rely on unabated combustion of fossil fuels.
If all of these assets, as well as power plants currently under construction, were operated for similar lifetimes and in similar ways as in the past, they would still be emitting around 10 Gt of CO 2 in 2050.
That is why the SDS not only includes much faster deployment of clean energy technologies, but also envisages the opera tion of existing carbon -intensive assets in a very different way from the STEPS.
Existing coal -fired power plants, for example, are either retrofitted, repurposed or retired in the SDS in order to halve coal -fired emissions by 2030.
The transformation has to extend well beyond the power sector The power sector takes the lead, but a wide range of strategies and technologies are required to tackle emissions across all parts of the energy sector.
Emissions from the power sector drop by more than 40% by 2030 in the SDS , with annual additions of solar PV almost tripling from today's levels.
Electricity takes an ever -greater role in overall energy consumption, as rising output from renewables and nuclear power helps to bring down emissions from sectors – such as p assenger transport – that are cost effective to electrify.
The harder tasks for the transformation of the energy sector lie elsewhere, particularly in industrial sectors such as steel and cement, in long -distance transport, in the balancing of multiple cha nges taking place in parallel across a complex energy system, and in securing and maintaining public acceptance.
Maintaining a strong pace of emissions reductions post2030 requires a relentless focus on energy and material efficiency, electrification, and a strong role for low -carbon liquids and gases.
Low -carbon hydrogen and CCUS scale up significantly, building on a decade of rapid innovation and deployment in the 2020s.
The vision of a net -zero emissions world is coming into focus… The ambitious pathway mapped out in the SDS relies on countries and companies hitting their announced net- zero emissions targets on time and in full.
These are mostly targets for 2050, although there are individual countries that have set earlier targets a nd, most recently, China announced a 2060 date for carbon neutrality.
Realising these goals is important not only for the countries and companies concerned, but also for accelerating progress elsewhere by bringing down technology costs and by developing regulations and markets for low -emissions products and services.
Executive Summary 23 …and ambitious actions over the next decade are critical Reaching net zero globally by 2050, as in the NZE2050, would demand a set of dramatic additional actions over the next ten years .
Bringing about a 40% reduction in emissions by 2030 requires, for example, that low -emissions sources provide nearly 75% of global electricity generation in 2030 (up from less than 40% in 2019), and that more than 50% of passenger cars sold worldwide in 2030 ar e electric (from 2.5% in 2019).
Electrification, massive efficiency gains and behavioural changes all play roles, as does accelerated innovation across a wide range of technologies from hydrogen electrolysers to small modular nuclear reactors.
No part of the energy economy can lag behind, as it is unlikely that any other part would be able to move at an even faster rate to make up the difference.
Getting to net zero will require unwavering efforts from all To reach net -zero emissions, governments, energy companies, investors and citizens all need to be on board – and will all have unprecedented contributions to make.
The changes that deliver the emissions reduction in the SDS are far greater than many realise, and need to happen at a time when the world is trying to recover from Covid- 19.
They rely on continuous support from key constituencies across the world, while also meeting the development aspirations of a growing global population.
Achieving net -zero emissions globally by 2050 goes well beyond this, b oth in terms of the actions within the energy sector and those that would be required elsewhere.
For any pathway to net zero, companies will need clear long -term strategies backed by investment commitments and measurable impact.
The finance sector will nee d to facilitate a dramatic scale up of clean technologies, aid the transitions of fossil fuel companies and energy- intensive businesses, and bring low -cost capital to the countries and communities that need it most .
Engagement and choices made by citizens will also be crucial, for example in the way they heat or cool their homes, or how they travel.
Governments have the decisive role At a moment when Covid- 19 has created extraordinary uncertainty, governments have unique capacities to act and to guide the actions of others.
They can lead the way by providing the strategic vision, the spur to innovation, the incentives for consumers, the policy signals and the public finance that catalyses action by private actors, and the support for communities where livelihoods are affected by rapid change.
They have the responsibility to avoid unintended consequences for the reliability or affordability of supply.
Our secure and sustainable energy future is a choice – for consumers, investors and industries, but most of a ll, for governments.
All rights reserved.Comments and questions are welcome and should be addressed to: Laura Cozzi and Tim Gould Directorate of Sustainability, Technology and Outlooks International Energy Agency 9, rue de la Fédération 75739 Paris Cedex 15 France E-mail : weo@iea.org More information about the World Energy Outlook is available at www.iea.org/weo .
All rights reserved.PA RT A OVERVIEW AND INTRODU CTION Part A of the World Energy Outlook provides the key findings and the context for this year's analysis.
Chapter 1 draws upon material from throughout the report to answer two key questions.
First, what does the Covid -19 pandemic mean for the energy sector, and second, what now are the prospects for an acceleration in clean energy transitions?
It includes analysis from all of the various scenarios and c ase studies presented in the Outlook.
Chapter 2 provides essential context.
It provides an update d assessment of the immediate effects of the pandemic on the global energy sector in 2020.
It then defines the scenarios and details the policy, technology, ma croeconomic and demographic assumptions utilised in the analysis.
All rights reserved.Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 27 Chapter 1 Overview and key findings A tale of two opacities •There are two key themes in this World Energy Outlook 2020 (Outlook ): the impact of Covid -19 on the energy sector and the prospects for accelerated energy transitions.
These themes are interlinked and subject to major near- term uncertainties, in particular relating to the duration and severity of the pandemic, its economic implications and the extent to which energy and sustainability are built into recovery strategies.
We explore the pathways out of today's crisis in multiple scenarios and cases, with a focus on the next ten years.
•Our updated assessment of the immediate effects of the pandemic on the energy system shows expected falls in 2020 of 5% in globa l energy demand, 7% in energyrelated CO 2 emissions and 18% in energy investment.
Oil consumption is anticipated to decline by 8% in 2020 and coal use by 7%.
Renewables, especially those in the power sector, are less affected than other fuels by the pandemic and its aftermath.
Figure 1.1 ⊳ Total primary energy demand by fuel and scenario The energy mix over the next ten years will be shaped by the impact of the pandemic, but also by the policy response and the sustainability of the recovery •The Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) is based on today's policy settings and an assumption that the pandemic is brought under control in 2021.
In this scenario, global GDP also returns to p re-crisis levels in 2021, and global energy demand in early 2023, but outcomes vary sharply by fuel.
Re newables meet 90% of the strong growth in global electricity demand over the next two decades, led by continued high levels of solar PV deployment, but global coal use never gets back to previous levels.
By 2040, coal's share in global energy demand dips b elow 20% for the first time in modern energy history.3 0006 0009 00012 00015 0002019Mtoe Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Renewables Traditional use of biomass-6 000-4 000-2 00002 000 STEPS DRS SDS NZE2050Change 2019 to 2030MtoeSUMMARY IEA.
28 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction • In the Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS) , the same policy settings lead to different energy outcomes because a prolonged pandemic has deeper and longer lasting economic and social impacts.
Global GDP doe s not recover to pre -crisis levels until 2023 , and global energy demand only returns in 2025.
Oil demand flattens out below the 100 mb/d mark, some 4 mb/d below the level in the STEPS.
Behavioural changes due to the pandemic affect the oil outlook in multi ple ways, but the DRS, like the STEPS, does not yet show oil demand reaching a clear peak.
• Today's policy settings, as modelled in the STEPS and in the DRS, produce a much slower rebound in emissions than was seen after the 2008 -09 financial crisis.
Howeve r, they do not deliver a decisive break in the trend for global CO 2 emissions.
A slightly lower trajectory for emissions in the DRS than in the STEPS is due to reduced economic activity, rather than structural changes in the way that energy is consumed or produced.
A higher carbon intensity of the economy in this scenario illustrates the peril of mistaking low growth for a solution to climate change.
• A structural transformation of the energy sector will require massive investment in new, more efficient and cleaner capital stock.
Drawing on the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan, the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) sees a near -term surge of investment in clean energy technologies over the next ten years.
Along with action to reduce emissions from existing infrastructure, this is enough to make 2019 the definitive peak year for global CO 2 emissions.
In the SDS, CO 2 emissions are nearly 10 Gt lower than in the STEPS by 2030, and reductions in air pollutant emissions produce significantly cleaner air than experienced during the 2020 lockdowns.
• Progress towards universal access to electricity and to clean cooking facilities risks being slowed or reversed, notably in sub -Saharan Africa.
While many major economies are set for an extended period of very low borrowin g costs, access to finance in many developing economies could be more constrained, especially in the DRS, complicating the outlook for energy investment.
• The pandemic has intensified the uncertainties facing the oil and gas industry.
The timing and extent of a rebound in investment from the one -third decline seen in 2020 is unclear, given the significant overhang of supply capacity in oil and gas markets, and uncertainties over the outlook for US shale and for global demand.
Pressure is meanwhile increasing on many parts of the industry to clarify the implications of energy transitions for their operations and business models, and to explain the contributions that they can make to reducing emissions.
• The SDS sets out a possible pathway for a very ambitious transformation of the energy sector which incorporates full implementation of existing net -zero pledges for 2050 and earlier.
The Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE2050) case, explored in detail for the first time in this Outlook , sets out what additional mea sures would be required over the next ten years to put the world as a whole on track for net -zero emissions by mid -century.
Achieving this goal would involve a significant further acceleration in the deployment of clean energy technologies together with wi deranging behavioural changes.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 29 1 Introduction In an extraordinary year for the world and for the energy sector, two questions stand out.
What does the Covid -19 pandemic mean for the energy sector?
And what now are the prospects for an acceleration in clean energy transitions?
For the moment, the answers to both of these questions are opaque, but clarity will come one way or another in the next few years.
That is why, in contrast to the usual World Energy Outlook (WEO ) approach, the focus in this Outlook is very much on the crucial next decade to 2030.
These questions are interlinked – Covid -19 has shaken up the energy sector, but the most significant disruption has been reserved for the most emissions -intensive fuels.
So are the reductions in energy demand and emissions going to be maintained, and if so why?
Could more secure and sustainable energy systems emerge during recovery from the damage of 2020?
Or will the prospects for accelerated energy transitions and other sustainable development objectives be damaged by the Covid -19 crisis ?
Today's uncertainty underlines the value of a scenario -based approach.
To explore the impact of the pandemic on the energy sector, we use two scenarios that are based on different assumptions about its duration an d its economic impact:  The Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) assumes that significant risks to public health are brought under control over the course of 2021, allowing for a steady recovery in economic activity.
This scenario incorporates our assessment o f all the policy ambitions and targets that have been legislated for or announced by governments around the world.
 The Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS) retains the initial policy assumptions of the STEPS but takes a more pessimistic view on the outlook for public health and for the economy.
In this scenario, a prolonged pandemic has deeper and longer lasting impacts on a range of economic, social and energy indicators than is the case in the STEPS.
To investigate what more it would take to accelerate clean e nergy transitions, the two key sets of projections are:  The Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) is based on the same economic and public health outlook as the STEPS, but works backwards from climate, clean air and energy access goals, examining what act ions would be necessary to achieve those goals.
The near- term detail is drawn from the recent IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan, which boosts economies and employment while building cleaner and more resilient energy systems (IEA, 2020a).
 The Net Zero Emissions by 2050 case (NZE2050) supplements the SDS analysis.
The SDS sees many advanced economies reaching net -zero emissions by 2050 at the latest, and puts the world on track for net -zero emissions by 2070 .
The NZE2050 includes the first detailed IEA modelling of what would be needed over the next ten years to put CO 2 emissions on a pathway to net -zero emissions globally by 2050.
Figures and tables from this chapter are accessible through your IEA account : .
30 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction Impacts of Covid- 19 on the energy outlook The starting point for this Outlook is an updated assessment of what has happened to the energy sector and energy -related investment during 2020.
We provide the latest data and estimates for the immediate impact of the pandemic on the energy sector in Chapter 2; the updates to the analysis that appeared earlier in the year in the Global Energy Review (IEA, 2020b ) and the World Energy Investment (IEA, 2020c ) are slight; these initial estimates – all made early in the second -quarter of the year – have held up well.
Energy demand in 2020 is set to be down year -on-year by around 5%.
Over the past century, only World Wars and the Great Depression have produced a larger decline.
Some parts of the energy sector were hit harder than others.
Oil demand is anticipated to decline by 8%, with aviation fuel demand the worst affected segment, and coal demand by 7%.
Since the most carbon- intensive fuels, coal and oil, are bearing the brunt of this demand reduction, and renewables are least affected, the 7% anticipated fall in energy -related carbon dioxide ( CO 2) emissions is set to be larger than the drop in energy demand as a whole.
We also estimate that there will be a reduction of 18% in energy investment in 2020, with the largest drop in spending on new oil and gas supply.
Changes in technology costs – a dynamic backdrop fully incorporated into our scenarios – provide a strong underlying impetus to changes in the energy sector.
In this Overview , we highlight eight key themes that illustra te and explore the impact of Covid -19 on the energy outlook.
1.1 The pandemic is far from over and many uncertainties remain It is still far from clear how long the Covid -19 health emergency and the accompanying economic slump will last.
The two issues are naturally linked; success in bringing the pandemic under control would facilitate a recovery in economic activity, while prolonged outbreaks of Covid -19 would weigh heavily on the prospects for growth.
This major uncertainty is explored in the comparison bet ween two scenarios – the STEPS and the DRS.
In the STEPS, the continued significant risks to public health diminish over the course of 2021, whether due to a vaccine or highly effective therapeutics, meaning that the global economy recovers to 2019 levels over the course of 2021 and total energy demand by early 2023 .
In the DRS, by contrast, global economic activity takes a further two years to get back to pre -crisis levels in 2023, and the return of total energy demand to pre -crisis levels is postponed until 2025 ( Figure 1.2).
Neither set of projections manages to shake off entirely the effects of the pandemic.
In the STEPS, the global economy is still around 7 % smaller in 2040 than projected in the World Energy Outlook -2019 (WEO -2019) .
The growth rate for energy consumption in the STEPS is similar from the mid -2020s onwards, but the level of energy use in the mid -2020s is around three -four years behind previous projections.
There are significant variations in the outcom es by fuel.
Renewables and nuclear are least affected by the pandemic and its aftermath, and coal is hit hardest: it never returns to pre -crisis levels of demand, remaining IEA.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 31 1 on average 8 % lower than in pre -crisis projections through to 2030 due to a combina tion of growth in renewables, competitively priced natural gas and coal phase -out policies.
Energy demand in advanced economies has been on a declining trend since 2007, and does not return to 2019 levels in the STEPS.
Elsewhere energy demand rebounds quite rapidly in those parts of the world that had early success in bringing the pandemic under control – The People's Republic of China ("China" hereafter in this Outlook ) returns to growth during 2020.
The negative impacts persist for longer in many lower income countries.
Figure 1.2 ⊳ Gross domestic product and primary energy demand by scenario A weaker economic outlook puts many aspects of global energy into slow motion Note s: 2020e = estimated values for 2020; Ren.
= renewables; EMDE = emerging market and developing economies .
The pre -crisis trajectory is represented by the WEO- 2019 Stated Policies Scenario projection .
In the DRS, the long -term effects of Covid -19 are much more visible, as a deeper near -term slump erodes the growth potential of the economy: high unemployment wears away human capital, and bankruptcies and structural economic changes mean that some physical assets become unproductive as well.
By 2030, the global economy is 7 % smaller than in the STEPS.
All economies are affected, but those where governments are least able to cushion the blow from the pandemic are hit hardest.
China's energy demand grows only half as fast as in the STEPS, and levels of global energy consumption in this scenario eventually lag around five years behind the STEPS.
-20%-15%-10%-5% Coal Gas Oil Nuclear Ren.Change versus pre -crisis in 2030-20%-15%-10%-5% World EMDE Advanced economiesChange versus pre -crisis in 2030 75 100 125 150 2020e 2025 2030Index (2019 = 100)Energy demand Pre-crisis STEPS DRS Reaching 2019 levels 75 100 125 150 2020e 2025 2030Index (2019 = 100)Gross domestic product IEA.
All rights reserved.32 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction These scenarios affect different fuels and technologies in various ways, and lead to different outcomes for prices, investment and progress towards s ustainable development goals.
One thing they have in common, however, is that they both start from the same initial set of assumptions about energy policies.
Changes to current policy settings, including changes resulting from new measures to promote a sustainable recovery from today's economic slump, would make a material difference to the energy projections and the environmental consequences.
1.2 Today's policy settings do not produce a decisive break in the outlook for CO 2 emissions, but a more sustainable recovery is possible The immediate priority for governments around the world has been to contain the spread of the virus and mitigate the short -term economic impacts.
The capacity to act effectively in this respect has varied widely, in large part for fiscal reasons but also because of institutional and structural factors, notably the size of the informal economy in many developing economies.
The crisis has underscored the critical role of governments and reinforced the perception that – if 2020 is to mark a turning point for the energy sector – then it will be government policies and recovery strategies that drive the necessary changes.
There is a strong case to build energy and sustainability into the recovery strategies that governments are n ow putting together (see section 1.9).
Full implementation of the measures in a Sustainable Recovery Plan, developed by the IEA in co -operation with the I nternational Monetary Fund and set out in the recent Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report (IEA, 2020a) , would put the energy sector on track to meet the goals of the SDS.
However, while some governments have announced goals to boost spending on sustainability, clean energy technologies have generally not yet featured prominently in the Covid-1 9 recovery plans proposed to date, except in the case of the European Union, the United Kingdom, Canada, Korea, New Zealand a nd a handful of other countries.
The STEPS is designed to take a detailed and dispassionate look at the policies that are either in place or announced in different parts of the energy sector.
It takes into account long -term energy and climate targets only to the extent that they are backed up by specific policies and measures.
In doing so, it holds up a mirror to the plans of t oday's policy makers and illustrates their consequences, without second -guessing how these plans might change in future.
And what the mirror shows is sobering (Figure 1.3) .
In this scenario, after a 7% anticipated fall in 2020, CO 2 emissions rebound in 2021, exceed 2019 levels in 20 27, and rise to 36 gigatonnes ( Gt) in 2030.
A ir pollution causes nearly 6 million premature deaths in 2030 in the STEPS, about 10% more than today.
These projections for emissions in the STEPS are lower than in the corresponding scenario in the WEO -2019 , largely as a result of lower technology costs and more determined policy action in some regions and sectors, faster declines in projected coal demand and more rapid projected deployment of rene wables ( see section 1.3), as well as lower economic growth.
However, the emissions trajectory remains far from the immediate peak and IEA.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 33 1 decline in emissions that is needed to meet climate goals, including the Paris Agreement.
There are reasons for optimism about the future, but there should be no illusions about where we are today: the world is still well off track to address climate change and meet sustainable development goals.
Figure 1.3 ⊳ Energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions by recovery trajectory Emissions are reduced relative to a pre- crisis trajectory in each scenario, but only a fully sustainable recovery leads to their long -term structural decline Note: Gt CO 2 = gigatonnes of carbon dioxide; 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
Box 1.1 ⊳ Lower economic growth is not a low emissions strategy Some of the world's urban population caught a glimpse of a low emissions future in 2020, albeit under very strained circumstances, as lockdowns led to cleaner air and clearer skies.
Reductions in air pollutant emissions, whether from traffic or stationary sources, produce immediate gains in terms of air quality.
However, the same cannot be said of CO 2: here it is the cumulative weight of emissions over many decades that counts.
An anticipated reduction of emissions by 7% in 2020 is not a game -changer, especially since almost all of it is due to reduced economic activity.
The DRS illustrates the peril of mistaking low growth for a solution to climate change.
The first ten years of this scenario to 2030 s how the lowest rate of global energy demand growth since the 1930s .
As a result, CO 2 emissions are 2 Gt lower by 2030 than in the STEPS.
However, the driver for lower emissions remains lower economic activity, rather than any structural change in the way that energy is consumed or produced.
Moreover, although lower than in the STEPS, annual emissions in the DRS in 2030 are already 7 Gt above the level that would be consistent with the goals in the Paris Agreement.
20 25 30 35 40 2015 2020e 2025 2030Gt CO₂STEPS Sustainable Recovery (SDS)Delayed RecoveryPre-crisis IEA.
All rights reserved.34 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction Lower fuel prices in the DRS and a reduced capacity, in straitened economic circumstances, to invest in the development and deployment of cleaner, more efficient technologies actually slow energy transitions and increase the carbon intensity of the economy compared with the STEPS: emissions fall by less than the drop in energy service demands.
The marginal gains in emissions reductions in the DRS therefore come at a high price, and fail to prevent the economy becoming more emissionsintensive than in the STEPS.
The DRS has other disadvantages too, including the damage it does to the prospects for the world's poorest people (see section 1.7) , making it much more challenging to meet the goal of sustainable energy for all.
The bottom line is that the structural transformation of the energy sector depends on massive investment in new, more efficient and cleaner capital stock.
The SDS illustrates that there need not be a trade-o ff between economic and environmental performance: it shows a robust economic recovery accompanied by rapid reductions in emissions.
1.3 Renewables are taking power and solar is the new k ing Power generation from renewables is the only major source of energy that has continued to grow in 2020, and this resilience sets the tone for the next decade and beyond.
The outcomes for renewable sources of generation in our scenarios range from strong to spectacular.
In the STEPS, renewables meet about 8 0% of the growth in global electricity generation over the next decade, overtaking coal by 2025 as the primary means of producing electricity.
In the SDS and the NZE2050, they perform more strongly still.
Solar is leading the charge, and becomes the new king of electricity supply.
Setting new records for deployment each year through to 2030 in the STEPS, solar photovoltaic ( PV) capacity grows by an average of 1 2% per year to 2030.
Policy support frameworks reduce project risks and make possible very low financing costs ( Box 1.2 ).
The advance of renewable sources of generation, and of solar in particular, is even more striking in the SDS, where annual capacity additions o f solar PV take place at double the pace of the last four years through to 2025 and then keep rising to 2030.
In the SDS, the combined share of solar PV and wind in global generation rises from 8% in 2019 to almost 30% in 2030, putting a strong premium on robust and well -functioning electricity networks (see section 1.4).
Storage also plays an increasingly vital role in ensuring the flexible operation of power systems: India becomes the largest market for utility -scale battery storage by 2040 as its investm ent in solar PV expands rapidly.
Solar remains a cost -effective choice even in the straitened circumstances of the DRS.
The contrast between the outlook for solar PV and for coal is stark (Figure 1.4).
Over the next decade, global power plant construction shifts rapidly away from coal in the STEPS, and the share of coal in the global generation mix falls from 37% in 2019 to 28% in 2030.
The rise of renewables, combined with cheap natural gas and coal phase -out policies, means that coal demand in advanced economies drops by almost half to 2030.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 35 1 coal use in India and other countries in South and Southeast Asia is markedly lower than in previous editions, and is not enough to offset declines elsewhere.
By 2040, the share of coal in total primary energy supply dips below 20% for the first time in modern energy history.
In the SDS, coal fares much worse, and its share falls below 10%.
Figure 1.4 ⊳ Average annual solar PV and coal annual capacity additions worldwide and electricity generation by scenario Solar PV becomes a preeminent force in electricity supply in the STEPS due to falling costs and policy support, but the potential is there for much more rapid growth Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Box 1.2 ⊳ Falling financing costs have accelerated solar PV cost declines Global solar PV capacity has increased almost 20 -fold over the last decade and is set to triple over the coming decade in the STEPS.
Targeted policies in over 1 30 countries and technology cost gains have been key drivers of this expansion, and they have helped in turn to bring down the cost of financing, which accounts for 20 -50% of the overall levelised cost of generation for new utility -scale solar PV projects.
A dedicated analysis was undertaken for this report, based on data from financial markets and academic literature, and on the analysis of auction results and power purchase agreements, complemented by a large number of interviews with experts and practitioners around the world.
The analysis of business models draws on the key revenue risk components – price, volume and off -taker risk – and their implications for the cost of capital.
A maturing technology and support mechanisms that stabilise revenues, while promoting competition, have had a sub stantial impact on the prevailing financing costs for utility -scale solar PV projects.
As of 2019, we estimate that the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) for new projects stood at 2.6 - 5.0% in Europe and the United States, 4.4 - 5.4% in China and 8.
8 - 10.0% in India (all in nominal terms after tax).
Financiers have also been willing to lend higher shares of the project cost (70 -80% in 2019).
Full merchant projects, without any form of price guarantee external to markets, -5 000-2 50002 5005 000 2001-10 2010-19 2019-30TWhChange in electricity generation Coal: STEPS SDS Solar PV: STEPS SDS 75 150 225 300 2000 2010 2020e 2030GWAnnual capacity additions IEA.
36 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction provide a useful point of co mparison and show indicative WACCs several percentage points higher in Europe and China, although there are only relatively few projects of this sort to date for solar PV.
These factors have brought down the levelised costs of electricity (LCOE) of utility -scale solar PV to equal or below that of new coal - and gas- fired power plants in major regions around the world.
In some cases, the LCOE of solar PV developed under revenue supported mechanisms can provide electricity at or below $20 per megawatt -hour (MW h): the lowest price seen in a competitive auction so far is $13/MWh in Portugal in August 2020.
At these price levels, solar PV is one of the lowest cost sources of electricity in history.
For new investment decisions, new utility -scale solar PV projects are in the range of $30 -60/MWh in Europe and the United States, and $20 -40/MWh in China and India.
These ranges are consistent with the average prices reported in recent auction results.
In light of these very low costs and an evaluation of value provided to the system through the value -adjusted LCOE ( see Chapter 6, Box 6.3), solar PV is now the most cost -effective new source of electricity in many countries around the world.
1.4 Modern societies are becoming ever more reliant on electricity, but weak grids could prove to be an Achilles heel Growth in electricity demand has consistently run at around twice the pace of overall energy demand growth in recent years.
In 2020, a similar pattern is visible: a 2% anticipated fall in electricity demand is less than half the expected 5% drop in overall energy use.
One of the assertions that can be made with confidence about the future of energy is that the share of electricity in overall consumption will continue to increase.
The debate is how far and how fast this wil l go.
From just under 20% today, electricity reaches a share of 24% in final consumption by 2040 in the STEPS (and 23% in the DRS), but a much larger 3 1% in the SDS, reflecting the importance of electrification and low emission s electricity to energy trans itions.
In practice, given that electricity delivers useful energy services with better efficiency than other fuels, the role of electricity is even greater than these numbers would suggest.
Rising levels of ownership of household appliances and air condit ioners, together with increasing consumption of goods and services, underpin electricity demand growth in emerging market and developing economies, with the fastest growth in India, Southeast Asia and Africa.
In advanced economies, the electrification of transport, and to a lesser extent heat, are increasingly important forces pushing electricity use up, although some new applications of electricity such as the production of hydrogen via electrolysis also become visible, especially in the SDS.
The upward march of electricity, and the integration of new wind and solar generation, depends on adequate investment in all parts of the system, including electricity networks.
These are the backbone of today's power systems, and they become even more important to the provision of reliable and secure supply in rapid energy transitions.
An additional 2 million kilometres (k m) of transmission and 14 million km of distribution lines are set to IEA.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 37 1 be added over the next decade in the STEPS, 80% more than was added in the last ten years.
As networks are modernised, expanded and digitalised, projected grid investment reaches $4 60 billion in 2030 , up two -t hirds from the level in 2019 .
Despite this, there is a risk that electricity networks will become a weak link in the chain.
Under today's regulatory systems, there is a risk of revenue shortfalls arising, from lowerthan -expected demand, non -payment of bills, or the deteriorating financial condition of utilities in many developing economies.
This could make it more difficult for networks to undertake the investments that are needed to ensure the future reliability and security of electricity systems.
The warning signs are especially visible in the DRS: despite dampened energy demand, substantial investments by grid operators are necessary amid significant downward risks for anticipated revenues.
Our analysis underlines the importance of adequate infrastructure planning (including the linkages with plans for gas networks), of the governance of such planning, and of regulation and r egulatory oversight.
1.5 The pandemic could trigger lasting changes in consumer behaviour, but these w ould not transform the oil market on their own Oil consumption was hit early and severely by lockdowns, falling at a pace that was well in excess of the immediate capacity of the supply side to react.
The extreme stresses and strains on oil markets in the first -half of 2020 gave way to an uneasy balance in the thirdquarter of the year, with prices remaining in a fairly narrow range around the low $40s/barrel.
Local lockdown measures, continued teleworking and the weak aviation sector continue to subdue consumption, however, meaning that the shadow of the pandemic still looms over the near -term outlook for oil.
The role of behavioural factors in shaping market developments in 2020 has sparked a vigorous debate over their long -term impact.
To a large degree this will depend on the duration of the pandemic and the shape of the recovery; the extent of teleworking and reductions in air travel demand is much more engrained in the DRS than in the STEPS.
However, while influential, these behavioural factors are not game -changers in these scenarios, for two main reasons.
First, there are some countervailing consumer trends that serve to push up oil demand, such as delayed replacement of older, inefficient vehicles due to increased economic uncertainty.
Second, the impact of these behavioural changes is much smaller than the impact of the major drivers of long -term transport oil consumption: underlying demand for mobility (especially the effect of rising incomes in emerging market and developing economies), the efficiency of oil use, and the pace of switching to other technologies, fuels or modes.
Before the pandemic, these latter variables – all heavily influenced by government policies – were already pointing to a marked slowdown in the rate of future demand growth in the STEPS, including a near- term peak in oil use for passenger cars due to fuel efficiency gains and the rise of electric vehicles.
These overall contours r emain visible in our new projections, but oil demand in absolute terms is lower: in the STEPS by more than 2 million barrels per day ( mb/d ) in 2030 compared with the corresponding scenario in the WEO -2019 IEA.
38 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction (despite a markedly lower price trajectory) ; and in the DRS by a further 4 mb/d, with demand flattening out below the 100 mb/d mark (Figure 1.5) .
Oil consumption reaches a plateau in both these scenarios by the 2030s, but in the absence of much stronger policy action (as modelled in the SDS) neither scenario shows a pronounced peak in overall demand.
Figure 1.5 ⊳ Oil demand by scenario and changes by key sector Transport fuels are no longer a reliable motor for oil demand growth; oil demand plateaus by the 2030s in both the STEPS and the DRS Notes: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
L ong-distance transport includes road freight, shipping and aviation.
Petrochemicals include feedstock use only.
The pre- crisis trajectory is represented by the WEO -2019 Stated Policies Scenario projection .
The sector where behavioural change has the longest lasting effect is aviation, which accounts for over 7% of total o il consumption today.
More than a quarter of air passengers travel for business purposes, and the expectation in the STEPS is that the lasting impacts of behavioural changes will be concentrated mostly on this segment as business trips are replaced by vide o conferencing.
Personal travel is assumed to be heavily affected in the near term, but this effect wanes over the next decade.
A 10% reduction in business trips – as assumed in the STEPS – takes around 0.2 mb/d off oil demand in 2030.
In the DRS, the assu mptions are more stringent: a 25% reduction in business travel and a 10% reduction in personal leisure travel.
This removes an additional 0.7 mb/d from 2030 demand.
These are large effects, especially for the airline industry, but not enough on their own t o reshape the outlook for oil.
1.6 Lower fuel prices are a mixed blessing for energy security and sustainability The crisis has brought down the prices for all fuels, and our longer term price trajectories to 2040 remain lower in this Outlook than in last year's edition.
This reflects a near -term overhang of supply, slower projected consumption growth and changes to strategies and 80 90 100 110 2010 2020 2030 2040mb/dPre-crisis STEPS Reaching 2019 levelsDRSOil demand by scenario 2020e- 50 5 10 2010-19 STEPS DRS Cars Petrochemicals Other2019 -30 Long -distance transportmb/dChanges in demand by sector IEA.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 39 1 cost structures on the supply side.
Lower energy bills are already bringing some economic relief to consumers ; we estimate that aggregate end -use energy spending by households and companies is set to be around $1.3 trillion lower in 2020 than it was in 2019.
They also provide a lasting macroeconomic boost to many oil - and gas- importing countries, especially in Asia wh ere import dependence has been rising rapidly.
In some instances, as when very low gas prices help to push coal out of the electricity mix, lower prices can even deliver some reductions in emissions.
However, lower fuel prices tend to diminish incentives to switch away from incumbent fuels or to use them more efficiently, and make the task of expanding the share of low emission fuels – such as biofuels or low -carbon hydrogen – much more difficult.
They also place significant strains on those oil and gas -producing countries that are highly reliant on hydrocarbon revenues ( Box 1.3 ).
Box 1.3 ⊳ The case for a new development model for some major oil producers is clearer than ever, the funds to achieve it are not Estimates of future oil and gas income in some of the world's major producers have been steadily revised downwards over successive editions of the WEO .
Well befo re the appearance of Covid- 19, the shale revolution in the United States and the gathering pace of energy transitions had called into question the viability of development models that depend heavily on hydrocarbon revenues.
Now the pandemic has provided another major jolt, bringing down the revenues available to the world's producers in 2020 by close to half.
The precise vulnerabilities vary by country, but a common denominator is that these reductions in revenue make the task of maintaining key public serv ices, including those concerned with public health, even more difficult, while also reducing the funding available for capital investment across all sectors of the economy.
Some lower cost producers, such as Saudi Arabia, the Russian Federation (hereafter "Russia" in this Outlook ), Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, still have substantial financial buffers, and these weather the storm better than others in our scenarios.
Other producers, notably Iraq and Nigeria, face acute fiscal difficulties and struggle to secure upstream investment or to improve the broader functioning of their energy sectors.
The challenges are heightened in many cases by demographic and social pressures, and in particular by the need to create jobs for large, youthful populations.
This underscores the importance of ambitions in these countries to deliver economic reform and diversification.
Increased momentum is crucial not only for these countries' own future prospects, but also for global energy markets and energy security.
However, while changing energy dynamics make the urgency of reform crystal clear, they also limit the means to achieve these ambitions.
Lower fuel prices are a key reason in the STEPS for a slowing of the rate at which the energy intensity of the global economy improves.
The annual rate of improvement falls to 2% IEA.
40 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction annually for 20 19-25 before rising slightl y in subsequent years.
This is significantly lower than pre -crisis projections of 2.4% per year, and far short of the improvement required to meet the goals of the SDS.
Lower fuel prices in the STEPS also mean that payback periods for investments to improv e efficiency are extended by 20- 40% for buildings and by 20 -30% for transport, compared with the WEO -2019 .
Enhanced energy efficiency mandates and incentives could help to compensate for weakened price incentives, and the extent to which these measures are built into recovery strategies will play a large part in determining the future uptake of more efficient goods.
1.7 This is a crisis that penalises the most vulnerable The health crisis and economic downturn caused by Covid -19 is compounding the difficulties faced by governments as they look to alleviate energy poverty and expand access.
Our latest country -by-country assessment finds that some 77 0 million people around the world lacked access to electricity in 2019, while around 2.
6 billion people lacked access to clean cooking facilities.
Progress in both these areas has since been set back by the pandemic.
Initial data for the first -half of 2020 for sales of distributed solar equipment in developing economies suggest a year -on-year fall of around one -quarter (GOGLA, 2020) .
Our analysis also suggests that, by the end of 2020, a rise in poverty levels may have made basic electricity services unaffordable for more than 1 10 million people with electricity connections, pushing many households back to traditional and inefficient fuels for lighting and heating (see Box 1.4 and Chapter 3).
In the STEPS, 6 60 million people remain without electricity in 2030 and 2.4 billion remain reliant on traditional uses of biomass for cooking.
These numbers are higher than in last year's Outlook as a result of the damaging effects of the pandemic and its aftermath.
There are even greater risks if the economic recovery is further delayed.
In the DRS, the extended public health emergency is inevitably a primary focus for governments and donors, and the scope for expanding access is narrowed by a weakened global economy: an additional 100 million people remain without access in 2030 compared with the STEPS, and a further 240 million without clean cooking.
Box 1.4 ⊳ Covid-19 is a major setback for Africa's energy development The future energy prospects of many African countries have been severely diminished by the Covid -19 pandemic.
Sub- Saharan Africa would be particularly exposed to a prolonged downturn of the kind posited in the DRS because many countries in the region have limited fiscal options, high existing levels of debt, and a fragile social infrastructure.
Our analysis suggests that the poverty already induced by the pandemic could lead around 6% of the population of sub -Saharan Africa who currently have electricity connections losing the ability to afford basic electricity services during 2020, with the worst effects being felt in countries such as Nigeria, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Niger.
Many of the entities working to improve access, such as rural electrification companies, are meanwhile facing serious financial difficulties.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 41 1 As a resu lt, sub -Saharan Africa is likely to see a substantial increase in the population without access to electricity in 2020 (Figure 1.6) .
This negative trend would be prolonged in the DRS, in which 630 million people in sub -Saharan Africa would remain without access to electricity in 2030 ( nearly one in two of the region's population), while the number of those in the region without access to clean cooking would rise to almost 1.1 billion people.
Figure 1.6 ⊳ Annual changes in population without access to electricity in sub-Saharan Africa by scenario The pandemic is having the most damaging impact on those populations that are the most vulnerable; progress in energy access has been significantly set back Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
African countries relying on imported fuels can expect a modest stimulus effec t from lower oil prices, but lower prices worsen the outlook for those countries looking to develop domestic oil and gas resources.
We estimate that net income for African oil and gas producers, on average, is set to be down by as much as 75% in 2020 compared with 2019, and projected income over the period to 2030 is 30% lower in the STEPS than in the WEO- 2019 .
Producers such as Nigeria and Angola struggle to mobilise upstream investment, and oil output in sub- Saharan Africa does not return to 2019 levels in the years through to 2040.
The region's natural gas output almost triples over the same period, but the prospects for new export -oriented projects, such as those in Mozambique, have been weakened .
The task of bringing much -needed investment to the region's power infrastructure is severely complicated by the weakened financial condition of utilities in the region and increased constraints on their access to capital.
Between 2019 and the first -half of 2020, the cost of borrowing increased by around two perc entage points on average across sub -Saharan Africa, and South Africa has seen one of the largest economy -wide hikes in the cost of capital among major emerging economies.
- 16- 80 8 162012 2014 2016 2018 2020e STEPS DRS SDSMillion people2021 -30 annual average -60 IEA.
42 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction 1.8 Covid -19 sharpens the dilemmas facing the oil and gas industry The events of 2020 have intensified a debate about the future roles of oil and natural gas in a changing energy economy and the position of the industry in the societies in which it operates.
This is the third major downturn for the industry in the last 12 years, and investment budgets for new oil and gas supply have faced particularly severe cuts in 2020, with very little leeway on this occasion to cushion the blow via further reductions in costs.
Estimated investment in oil and gas supply is down by one -third on average compared with 2019, and by half in some of the more exposed areas such as US shale.
A record year of approvals for new liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) liquefaction plants in 2019 has been followed by a year in which no new projects are likely to get the green light.
Leading companies have recently reduced the reported value of their assets by more than $50 billion, providing a very tangible expression of a shift in perceptions about future income from oil and gas operations (Figure 1.7).
Figure 1.7 ⊳ Estimated present value of future oil and natural gas production to 2040 by scenario The pandemic is prompting a re-evaluation of oil and gas strategies and assets Notes: Present value of future production is estimated revenue minus finding and development costs and operating costs, discounted at 10%.
Prices, production volumes and costs vary according to scenario.
The pre-cr isis value is represented by the WEO -2 019 Stated Policies Scenario projection.
Declines in production from existing fields eventually create a need for new upstream projects, even in rapid energy transitions.
However, the timing and extent of any required upswin g in investment is unclear, given the significant overhang of supply capacity in oil and gas markets and uncertainties over the demand outlook.
In oil markets, any slack in markets in recent years has largely been picked up by rising US shale output, but it is not clear whether (and if so when) shale will be in a position to continue this role amid a collapse in investor confidence in the sector.
There is a 4 mb/d difference in 2030 shale output between a world in which shale investment stays at 2020 5 10 15 20Trillion dollars (2019) Pre-crisis Stated Policies Scenario Sustainable Development ScenarioOil Natural gas -25% -50% -20% -50% IEA.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 43 1 level s and one where shale investment rebounds to its 2014 highs (the STEP S projections are broadly in the middle of these two).
There are questions too about whether conventional producers that have been hit hard by lower revenues will be able to step up their own activity.
These uncertainties create real potential for future market imbalances and volatility.
In LNG markets, a supply gap begins to emerge in the late -2020s in the STEPS, creating opportunities for as -yet unsanctioned projects in this scenario.
H owever, if recovery were to be delayed, as in the DRS, or if energy transitions accelerate, as in SDS, then the liquefaction capacity existing or under construction today would suffice through to the end of the decade.
Investors are now looking much more sceptically at the oil and gas sector, particularly in advanced economies, driven not just by concerns about financial performance but also by doubts about the compatibility of traditional company strategies with growing social and environmental pressures.
Refiners also face mounting competitive pressures and weakening demand growth for transport fuels, their main sources of profits.
Some of the financial concerns for those engaged in oil and gas supply might ease as and when prices pick up and projects offer better returns, but questions about emissions and climate change are not going to go away.
The strategic responses from companies to these pressures cover a broad spectrum.
This reflects the diversity of players in the industry, from specialised technical operators to huge national oil companies, but it also reveals a divergence of views about where future value lies and what kind of energy world will emerge from today's crisis.
At a minimum, there is likely to be a strong focus on projects that offer n ot only low costs but also low emission s intensities ( see section 1.13 ).
For some companies, this could be accompanied by efforts to deliver the energy system benefits of hydrocarbons, but without the emissions, which would involve investing in areas such as low -carbon hydrogen, biofuels or carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) technologies.
Others may choose a more far -reaching set of options, seeking to become energy companies rather than oil and gas companies, which would involve not only the pr ovision of low -carbon fuels but also diversification at scale into areas such as renewable power.
Prospects for clean energy transitions Today's policy settings, as modelled in the STEPS and DRS, produce a much slower rebound in emissions than was seen after the 2008 -09 financial crisis: a key reason for this is that rapid deployment of renewables, policies on the phase -out of coal and low natural gas prices together prevent a major rebound in coal demand.
However, as noted, the STEPS and DRS do not produce a decisive break in the trend for global CO 2 emissions.
Emissions in the STEPS are projected to pick up in 2021 after the 2.4 Gt drop seen in 2020, exceed 2019 levels in 2027, and then grow to 36 Gt in 2030.
Emissions in the DRS are slightly lower than in the STEPS due to the weakened economic outlook, but a weaker economy also drains momentum from the process of change in the energy sector.
44 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction In this section, we examine trajectories for the future that would deliver a trend break in emissions and put the world on a path to meet climate objectives, including those set out in the P aris Agreement.
The STEPS and the DRS both look at where agreed or announced policies lead, although they are based on different public health and economic assumptions.
The SDS and the NZE2050 instead start by defining future outcomes and then work through how they can be achieved.
In doing so, the SDS and the NZE2050 draw on an increasing number of real -world commitments to achieve net -zero emissions.
More than 125 countries so far have set or are actively considering long -term net -zero emissions targets.
Many companies and investor groups have also set such targets, or are considering doing so.
These targets vary in their timescale and in scope, and only around a dozen countries and the European Union – accounting for around 10% of global emissions – have actually formulated net -zero CO 2 targets in law or proposed legislation to this effect.
There remains a large gap, in many cases, between long -term ambitions and specific near- term plans.
Against that background, the analysis in the SDS and the NZE2050 in Chapters 3 and 4 provides guidance on the policies, technology developments, investments and behavioural changes that could deliver a more sustainable energy future, with a particular focus on actions over the next ten years.
Eight key themes from this analysis are summarised here.
1.9 Enhanced clean energy policies and investments can make 2019 the peak year for energy -related emissions The unique circumstances created by the pandemic have created opportunities to move emissions onto a different pathway by providing a boost to investment in clean energy technologies.
That is why the IEA formulated its Sustainable Recovery Plan (IEA, 2020 a), which provides a detailed set of options and proposals, tailored to individual country circumstances, for those governments around the world that are considering economic recovery plans.
Full implementation of the Sustainable Recovery Plan would increase annual investment in clean energy infrastructure by $1 trillion above historic levels in the three years from 2021-2023 .
Around 40% of this spending would fund efficiency measures; one -third would support the growth of low -emission electricity generation and the expansion and modernisation of electricity grids; most of the remainder would be spent on electrifying end-uses, making the production and use of fuels more sustainable, improving urban infrastructure, boosting innovation, and improving access to electricity and clean cooking.
If implemented in full, the Sustainable Recovery Plan would lead to global GDP being 3.5% higher in 2023 than it would otherwise be.
It would also save or create around 9 million jobs a year over the next three years – more than the 6 million jobs we estimate to be at risk across the energy sector as a result of the pandemic.
It would in addition deliver major emissions reductions.
The SDS incorporates the Sustainable Recovery Plan in full ; global CO 2 emissions are nearly 2.5 Gt lower in the SDS than in the STEPS by 2023, when the IEA.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 45 1 three -year recovery plan ends.
There are further substantial greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions savings from reductions in methane emissions from oil and gas operations.
In the SDS, the investments in the Sustainable Recovery Plan kick -start an accelerating longer term programme of spending on clean energy technologies whic h has a lasting influence on clean energy technology deployment.
The average annual level of investment in clean energy technologies and energy efficiency over the next ten years in the SDS is nearly $ 550 billion higher than in the STEPS.
This is enough to make 2019 the definitive peak year for global CO 2 emissions and to bring down emissions to a point nearly 10 Gt lower than the STEPS by 2030.
1.10 Today's energy infrastructure, if operated as per past practices, would lock in a temperature rise of 1.65 °C Addressing the climate challenge raises questions not only about what new investment is needed but also about the future of existing energy infrastructure – the accumulated stock of power plants, industrial facilities, buildings and vehicles that the world us es today.
All of this existing infrastructure, if it relies on fossil fuels, is associated with a certain level of future emissions – up until the moment that it is either retired, renovated or repurposed (Figure 1.8) .
Figure 1.8 ⊳ CO 2 emissions from energy infrastructure in use and power plants under construction operated in line with past practice CO 2 emissions from existing energy infrastructure and power plants under construction could already lead to a long- term temperature rise of 1.65 °C Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
In tandem with analysis for the Energy Technology Perspectives 2020 (IEA, 2020d ), we have conducted a bottom -up country -by-country analysis of existing energy infrastructure, 15 20 25 30 35 40 2010 2020e 2030Gt CO2 Existing energy infrastructure and power plants under construction Pathway for net -zero CO₂ emissions in 2050SDSHistorical IEA.
46 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction including power plants under construction.
On the assumption that all of this is operated in line with past practices, and that operational lifetimes for the various assets are typical, we estimate that this existing and under construction infrastructure would lead to global energy -related CO 2 emissions of around 26.5 Gt in 2030 and 10 Gt in 2050, falling to zero by 2070.
This level of emissions wou ld lead to a temperature increase of around 1.65 °C.
So even if no further fossil fuel powered infrastructure beyond that currently under construction was ever built without CCUS, and even if the world's households, companies and public authorities only ever bought zero -emissions equipment or facilities from now on, we would still be locked into a long -term temperature increase of 1.65 °C without changes to the way that existing infrastructure is used.
This is why the SDS incorporates a twin -track approach.
There is a systematic preference in favour of developing low -emission assets in the future.
Alongside this, existing carbonintensive assets are operated in a very different way than in the STEPS.
For example, there is a three -pronged approach to existing coal-fired plants, which in the SDS are retrofitted, repurposed or retired in order to provide a cost -effective pathway to cutting coal -fired emissions by 50% by 2030.
Retrofitting some coal -fired power plants with CCUS or biomass co-firing and repurposing others to focus on system adequacy and flexibility (remaining online but reducing total output) provides around 15 Gt CO 2 of cumulative emission reductions between 2019 and 2030 compared with the STEPS.
1.11 Within ten years, in the SDS, the drop in air pollutants would produce significantly cleaner air than experienced during the 2020 lockdowns Measures to contain the pandemic resulted in measurably cleaner air in many parts of the world.
Average levels of nitrogen oxide s (NO X) in Europe were down by 40% year -on-year in April 2020, and levels of particulate matter in the air dropped by 10% on average over the same period.
Sharp reductions in air pollutants were seen in cities across the world, notably in Asia, and polling data suggests that the inhabitant s were eager to preserve these gains, with upswings in support for more ambitious urban transport policies.
However, as traffic returned and stationary sources of emissions picked up, air quality worsened and in some cases even surpassed pre -Covid levels.
In China, for example, average levels of sul fur dioxide (SO 2) and fine particulate matter (PM 2.5) were above pre- crisis levels by the end of April 2020.
In the STEPS, measures to improve air quality cause emissions of the main pollutants to fall by around 10-2 0% to 2030.
However, population growth and urbanisation mean that an extra 850 million people live in cities by 2030 and become more exposed to polluted air.
Indoor air pollution, mainly from the traditional use of solid biomass as a cooking fuel, mea nwhile continues to create additional major health risks (exacerbated in the DRS by slower progress in tackling energy poverty).
Overall, in the STEPS, there are around 500 000 more premature deaths each year due to air pollution worldwide in 2030 than in 2020.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 47 1 The SDS does not eliminate air pollution entirely, but it reduces concentrations of each of the air pollutants dramatically (Figure 1.9) .
A rapid decline in coal use is the main reason for lower emissions of SO 2; cleaner transportation reduces NO X levels; most PM 2.5 reductions come from lower use of polluting fuels in cooking and domestic heating, though some come from other sources, including reductions in power plant and industrial emissions.
New analysis carried out in co -operation with the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA ) shows that concentrations of PM 2.5 in cities caused by power plants or buildings would all but vanish in the SDS, and there would also be major reductions in PM 2.5 emissions from road transport and energy -intensive industries.
In total, cities would see 45-65 % reductions in PM 2.5 concentrations by 2030, resulting in significantly cleaner air than was experienced during lockdowns.
This time, however, cleaner air would not come at the cost of disruption to economic activity or people's lives.
Figure 1.9 ⊳ Air pollution emissions by pollutant and related premature deaths, 2019 and 2030 Air pollutant emissions fall slightly in the STEPS, but rising urban populations lead to an increase in premature deaths from outdoor pollution to 2030 Source: IIASA and IEA analysis .
1.12 Gases – of different sorts – are pivotal to different stages of energy transitions, but are still in search of clear roles and business models Natural gas fare s considerably better than other fossil fuels in our Outlook , but variations across scenarios and countries call into question the simple characterisation of gas as a "transition fuel".
In the STEPS, a 30% rise in global natural gas demand to 2040 is concentrated in South and East Asia, where policy drivers – notably a push to improve air quality and support growth in manufacturing – combine with a lower natural gas price outlook to underpin the expansion of gas infrastructure.
However, natural gas demand i n advanced economies shows a slight decline to 2040 , the first time this has been projected 1 2 3 4 Outdoor IndoorMillion peoplePremature deaths -75%-20% 25 50 75 100 SO₂Mt 2019 2030 STEPS 2030 SDSAir pollutants emissions -30% -40% -60% PM2.5 NOX IEA.
48 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction in the STEPS.
Opportunities to displace coal are largely exhausted in these economies by the mid -2020s, and – especially in Europe – natural gas faces increasingly stern competition from renewables, efficiency, electrification of end -use demand, and from alternative low-carbon gases.
In the SDS, India is the only major economy that sees higher natural gas demand in 2040 than in the STEPS, although steady growth is also projected in China.
For emerging market and developing economies as a whole, growth in the SDS peters out before 2040.
For the world as a whole, natural gas consumption is over 10% below 2019 levels by 2040 and on a declining trend.
Figure 1.10 ⊳ Changes in natural gas demand by driver in the Stated Policies and Sustainable Development scenarios, 2019-2040 In the SDS, a changing gas industry takes on multiple roles to lower emissions, including via CCUS, coal -to-gas switching, support for renewables, and the ri se of low -carbon gases Note s: bcm = billion cubic metres .
Switching from natural gas includes renewables (including biogas and biomethane), nuclear, electricity and hydrogen.
Switching to natural gas includes coal, oil, traditional biomass and heat.
CCUS includes carbon capture in power generation, industry and steam methane reforming to produce hydrogen.
Natural gas produces fewer emissions when combusted as a fuel than coal, and this has traditionally been central to the environmental case for natural g as.
It remains an important consideration in carbon- intensive economies where gas is competing with coal.
However, it is less important in countries where coal use is already in structural decline.
Nor does it help much in countries, as in many parts of Europe, where the priority is to map a pathway to net- zero emissions.
In the SDS to 2040, the CO 2 emissions avoided by switching to natural gas are heavily outweighed by reductions arising from switching away from natural gas ( Figure 1.10 ).
-2 000 -1 500 -1 000 - 500 0 500 1 000 1 500 2 000 STEPS SDS Net changebcm Efficiency Switching from natural gaswithout CCUS Switching to natural gasGrowthwith CCUS IEA.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 49 1 Moreover, reducing CO 2 alone is not enough to achieve international climate goals.
The SDS sees early action to tackle methane emissions, especially from oil and gas operations, on the grounds that methane is a powerful greenhouse gas and there are many abatement options availa ble at very low cost.
There is also increasing transparency over the sources of these leaks, which is likely to add to the pressure for action to abate, and to make it easier for effective action to be taken ( Box 1.5).
Box 1.5 ⊳ Worst of the methane leaks are now visible from space Methane emissions were responsible for around 20 % of total GHG emissions in 2019.
The agriculture sector is the world's largest single source of anthropogenic methane emissions, but the energy sector – including oil, natural gas, coal and bioenergy – is the second -largest source.
Although there are many possible options for reducing methan e emissions from the energy sector at low cost , abatement has sometimes been hampered by a lack of reliable data.
One reason is that satellite observations are providing a way to identify the largest leaks.
The satellite Sentinel 5P, part of the European Space Agency Copernicus program me, provides frequent readings of methane concentration s across areas with a resolution of 5.5 km by 7 km.
Data processing by Kayrros, an earth observation firm, converts these readings to identify large sources of emissions, such as from oil and gas operations (Figure 1.11 ).
The current detection threshold is around 5 tonnes per hour (a methane leak of 5 tonnes per hour would be equivalent to around 1.3 million tonnes of CO 2-equivalent ( tCO 2-eq) per year if it emitted continuously).
The large sources of emissions from oil and gas operations detected using Sen tinel 5 P are estimated to release around 25 thousand tonnes of methane globally on average every day.
There are some limitations to the use of satellites.
They cannot provide data over snowy, marshy or offshore areas, and they cannot detect small emissions sources on a global scale , so they do not yet provide a complete picture.
Nonetheless, the latest data on these super- emitting sources reveal some important trends:  Methane emissions from oil and gas operations have not necessarily fallen in tandem with the drop in production in 2020.
Comparing data from January -August 2020 with the same period in 2019 indicates a rise in emissions in Algeria and Russia, while emissions in Turkmenistan have remained constant at very high levels.
So methane emissions may not have fallen during 2020 in the same manner as CO 2 emissions.
 There is a very wide range in the number and size of large methane emission s sources across oil - and gas -producing countries.
Based on annual data for 2019, Turkmenistan emits from large emissions sources around 2 7 tonnes of methane per thousand tonnes of oil equivalent (k toe) of oil and natural gas output.
The equivalent figu re for Saudi Arabia is 0.
In other words, there is more than a factor of 100 difference between some of the worst performing countries and IEA.
50 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction the better ones.
This gives a dispiriting picture of current emissions, but it also underlines that, for many countries, huge and rapid improvements in performance should be possible.
Figure 1.11 ⊳ Large methane emissions from oil and gas operations detected by satellite in 2019 and 2020 Satellite observations are providing a way to identify large -scale methane leaks that can be attributed to oil and gas operations around the world Note: Shows large methane emissions sources detected in an area of oil and gas operations in JanuaryAugust 2019 and 2020.
Source: Kayrros analysis based on modified Copernicus data.
There is a robust long -term case for gases in the energy system.
In the SDS, there are services that gases provide that it would be difficult to provide cost effectively using other sources : these include high temperature heat for industry, winter heat for buildings and seasonal flexibility for power systems.
Existing gas infrastructure is a valuable asset with significant storage capacity that could be repurposed over time to deliver large volumes of biomethane or, with modifications, low -carbon hydrogen.
Maintaining a gas infrastructure system alongside an electricity system also adds a lay er of resilience compared with an approach that relies exclusively on electricity.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 51 1 However, there is little consensus on how and when the transformation of today's natural gas supply industry might unfold, not least because of competing preferences and int erests along the gas value chain.
In the SDS, nearly a quarter of investment in gas supply goes to biomethane and low -carbon hydrogen by 2040, compared with around 1% today.
But the support mechanisms and business models that would close the cost gap betwe en these fuels and natural gas and stimulate this investment are, for the most part, absent today.
Much will depend on the stance taken by policy makers, at national and local levels, and by the readiness of financial institutions to lend support to low-carbon gas projects.
1.13 Transitions depend on government actions, but more than 70% of related investments could come from private actors Government policies and regulation, along with public finance, are critical to give momentum to clean energy transitions, b ut most of the actual investment will need to come from the private sector.
At the moment, state -owned enterprises (SOEs) account for over 35% of global energy investment, and their investment activities are generally focused on fuel supply and thermal pow er generation.
SOEs are sure to remain important actors during energy transitions, not least in areas such as electricity networks, where they account for 90% of grid spending in emerging market and developing economies.
Some SOEs have been created as vehi cles for low -carbon areas and others may diversify into these areas, but – based on today's ownership of different types of energy investment – more than 70% of clean energy and electricity network investment in the SDS is likely to come from private source s of capital .
This puts a premium on governments increasing the supply of bankable clean energy projects.
The public sector has an important role to play, as do development and green banks as well as infrastructure and clean energy funds, but much depends above all on the government undertaking infrastructure planning and putting in place appropriate market designs, regulatory frameworks and fiscal incentives.
As they pursue these tasks, there are three major issues in particular to consider in the context of the SDS.
The first is volume: whichever way the energy system evolves from here, a lot more capital will be required in the energy sector to ensure that energy supply is both reliable and adequate to meet demand.
In recent years, around $1.6 trillion each year has been invested in new energy supply infrastructure, although this fell in 2020 to around $1.3 trillion.
In the STEPS , within ten years, this would need to rise to more than $2 trillion.
The requirement for new supply investment is moderated in the SDS by a large parallel ramp up of spending on the demand side that brings down projected consumption.
The second is the split of investment across different sectors.
The total amount invested in clean energy – renewables, energy efficiency, low -carbon fuels, nuclear power, battery storage, CCUS – has remained static in recent years at around $600 billion per year.
Falling costs for key renewable technologies have put downward pressure on this figure, but the rising number of sustainable finance initiatives and taxonomies have yet to play a visible IEA.
52 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction role in pushing it up.
As a result, the share of total investment accounted for by investment in clean energy has been stuck at around one -third.
This would need to rise to around twothirds by 2030 in the SDS.
Investment in some clean energy sectors has remained relatively resilient in the face of the Covid -19 downturn, but funding and financing pressures for many countries and technologies have increased in the wake of Covid -19, so this resilience may be hard to sustain.
The third is geographical spread.
Global financial capital is largely concentrated in advanced economies and China.
However, most of the projected growth in energy service demand occurs in other emerging market and developing economies.
There are developing economies with strong records of attracting investment in renewables – the surge of solar PV in India bears ample witness to this.
However, existing imbalances in access to finance for sustainable energy projects could be exacerbated by the pandemic.
While many major economies are set for an extended period of very low borrowing costs, the changes in financing indicators observed in countries such as South Africa and Brazil in the first -half of 2020 would translate into an increase of up to 25% in the levelised costs of a new onshore wind farm investment.
Progress in addressing imbalances is likely to hinge on l inking sources of sustainable finance with the areas where there is the greatest need for investment, and aligning them with the capital requirements of energy companies and assets (Box 1.6 ).
Box 1.6 ⊳ Matching forms of finance with energy investment needs How companies across the energy sector fund their overall operations and growth varies significantly, with much depending on the type of developer and investor , and the risk and return profile of the asset.
In th is Outlook , we have car ried out our first detailed analysis of this issue, distinguishing between investments financed with debt and equity.
U nderstanding the capital structure of energy investments can be very useful for policy makers, not least as a guide to where limited public finance can have the greatest impact.
Energy investments have traditionally been financed primarily through equity, reflecting the role of balance sheet financing in oil and gas and other large energy companies.
However, there has been a loss of equ ity for many energy companies in 2020, and fuel supply investments and spending on higher risk projects have fallen sharply.
Meanwhile, the relative resilience of investments based on long -term predictable cash flows, such as renewable power, has offered better support for debtbased investments, reinforced by accommodative monetary policy.
The projected allocation of capital differs by scenario.
In the STEPS it is close to historical patterns, but in the SDS there is a higher level of reliance on debt -based financing for investments as a result of the increased emphasis placed on power sector projects and spending on demand -side technologies and efficiency improvements (Figure 1.12 ).
The contours vary by sector and country, and the mix of debt and equity IEA.
Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 53 1 can change over time within a single project, but in general this points towards a greater role for banks, bond markets and infrastructure funds, and underlines the potential value of initiatives by the financial community to develop a clear system of green and sustainable bonds.
In developing economies, improving the bankability of projects and the ability of companies to raise funds domestically and internationally have an important part to play in keeping costs down.
Figure 1.12 ⊳ Average annual energy investment by economy and instrument by scenario The energy sector will need to attract significant ly more investment in any future scenario; the SDS is likely to involve a shift towards more debt -based financing over time Note s: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
The instruments analysis is based on the mix of debt and equity that developers, house holds and project companies use to finance their investments.
Estimates are based on current observed capital structures by sector, derived from financing data on companies and consumers (for balance sheet financing) and assets (for project finance), applied to investment projections; equity includes grants.
1.14 Net-zero pledges for 2050 and earlier are already essential to the SDS; achieving global net -zero by 2050 would require a dramatic extra push The SDS relies on a group of countries and regions reaching net -zero emissions by 2050, or earlier in some cases.
This is critical to the overall reduction of global emissions in this scenario; achieving these targets in full and on time accelerates action elsewhere by helping to stimulate innovation and by developing regulations and markets for low emission products and services .
1 1 This is a contrast to the way that net -zero targets are treated in the STEPS, where they are implemented to the extent that they are backed up by detailed policies and measures in the various parts of the energy sector (see section 1.2) 400 8001 2001 6002 000 2014-19 2020e 2025-30 STEPS2025-30 SDSBillion dollars (2019) Advanced Emerging market and developingInvestment by economy 2014-19 2020e 2025-30 STEPS2025-30 SDS Debt EquityInvestment by instrument IEA.
All rights reserved.54 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction The SDS is based on a very ambitious transformation of the energy sector.
For example, annual capacity additions of solar PV rise from 108 gigawatts ( GW) in 2019 to over 280 GW in 2030 in the SDS, wind additions increase by 140% by 2030 and coal -fired generation without CCUS is cut by half by 2030.
Overall, low emission sources of electricity account for almost two -thirds of total generation globally by 2030 (up from less than 40% in 2019 ), while electric cars make up about 40% of new car sales (compared with 2.5 % in 2019 ).
Net-zero CO 2 emissions globally are reached by 2070 in the SDS.
If emissions were to remain at zero from this date, the SDS would provide a 50% probability of limiting the temperature rise to less than 1.65 °C, in line with the Paris Agreement objective of "holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C".
If negative emissions technologies were to be deployed after 2070 in the SDS (at levels well below the median in scenarios assessed by the I ntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [I PCC] ), the temperature rise in 2100 could be limited to 1.5 °C with a 50% probability.
Figure 1.13 ⊳ Evolution of selected technologies in the Sustainable Development Scenario and N et Zero Emissions by 2050 case The SDS maps out an energy transformation of huge magnitude and scope; the changes required in the NZE2050, inside and outside the energy sector, go well beyond this Attention is however increasingly turning to what it would mean for the energy sector globally to reach net -zero emissions by 2050, as in the NZE2050.
This would require energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions to be 20 .1 Gt, 6.
6 Gt CO 2 lower than in the SDS in 2030.
Bringing about emissions reductions on this scale and at this pace would require a 150 300 450 6002010-19 SDS NZE2050Solar PV Wind Other renewablesAverage annual capacity additions (GW/year)2020 -30 25% 50% 75% 100%2019 SDS NZE2050Electric vehicles Fuel cell vehiclesShare of cars and light trucks sales2030 75 150 225 3002019 SDS NZE2050Biogas and biomethane HydrogenLow -carbon gases (Mtoe)2030 IEA.
All rights reserved.Chapter 1 | Overview and key fi ndings 55 1 dramatic set of actions that go above and beyond the – already ambitious – measures in the SDS ( Figure 1.13) .
For example, low emission sources of electricity would need to provide nearly three -quarters of electricity generation in 2030, and more than half of passenger cars sold in 2030 would need to be electric.
The power sector has to lead the way, but low emission electricity cannot carry far -reaching energy transitions on its own: low- and zero -emission fuels and technologies like CCUS would also be required more quickly a nd at greater scale than in the SDS.
For this reason, there would also need to be a major push to accelerate technology innovation.
Reducing emissions to zero in sectors such as s teel and cement production could not be done without the commercialisation of technologies that have not yet been built or operated at full scale in most cases.
Technologies that are at large prototype or demonstration stage today would need to be made available twice as fast as in the SDS.
New industrial manufacturing capacity would also need to be developed rapidly.
Global battery manufacturing capacity would need to double every one -to-two years, and hydrogen production and distribution infrastructure would need to ramp up very quickly too.
A dramatic increase in investment in new and existing capital stock would not be enough on its own.
Members of society and consumers would also need to make different lifestyle choices, a topic analysed in detail for the first time in this Outlook (see section 1.15 ).
Among other things, this implies working to develop widespread understanding and support for the overall objective of achieving net -zero emissions by 2050, and efforts to ensure that energy transitions are handled in a transparent and just way.
The various changes that would be required to achieve the objective of net- zero emissions globally in 2050 in terms of technology deployment, innovation, investment and behaviour changes would be extremely demanding even if they were to happen in isolation.
The biggest challenge, however, is that these changes would need to be realised simultaneously and at a time when the world is recovering from the fallout of Covid -19.
If any sub -sector or industry were to lag behind, it is unlikely that any other sector would be able to move faster to mak e up the difference.
1.15 Behavioural changes are essential to achieve the scale and speed of emissions reductions required in the NZE2050 In addition to huge investments in low -emission electricity, infrastructure and innovation, achieving the emissions reductions in the NZE2050 over the period to 2030 and beyond depends on some important behavioural changes.
6 Gt gap in CO 2 emissions between the SDS and NZE2050 in 2030 is difficult to span entirely with structural changes within the energy sector itself, especially if the demand for energy services rises in line with expected economic and population growth.
For the NZE2050, analysis we examined the possible impact of 11 individual measures that, taken together, account for around one -third of the extra emissions reductions required on IEA.
56 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction top of those in the SDS to 2030 (Figure 1.14) .
Some behaviour changes are incorporated in the SDS, which assumes, for example, a partial switch for mobility from cars to public transport; they are far more extensive and wide -ranging in the NZE2050.
Figure 1.14 ⊳ CO 2 emissions reductions in the Sustainable Development Scenario and N et Zero Emissions by 2050 case, 2019-2030 Behavioural changes play a major role in reducing emissions to the extent required to achieve net- zero emissions globally by 2050 Note: Gt CO 2 = gigatonnes of carbon dioxide.
The illustrative measures included in the NZE2050 assume active decisions taken by consumers to reduce their environmental footprint.
These choices will be influenced by considerations of individual preference, personal welfare and affordability, but they will also be heavily shaped by government actions and, in some cases, mandates.
Some could probably be introduced quickly; others would need to build mor e gradually over time.
Just over half of the emissions savings from behavioural change in 2030 in the NZE2050 come from road transport, where we assume, for example, a reduction of 7 kilometres per hour ( km/h ) in average road traffic speeds, a growing use of ride -sharing for urban car trips, and a growing willingness to walk or cycle instead of using a car for very short journeys.
Around a quarter of the savings come from aviation, where we assume a 75% reduction in business trips to destinations further th an six hours flight and their replacement by video conferencing, and the replacement of flights under one hour with low -carbon alternatives such as high speed rail.
Most of the remaining changes are in residential energy use, where we assume, for example, a willingness to adjust space heating temperatures to save energy and emissions.
There is no expectation that everybody will be willing to make all these changes all at once: personal preferences, cultural preferences and individual circumstances are all bound to play a very important part.
The purpose is rather to illustrate the scale of behaviour change that is implied by the NZE2050 c ase.
10 20 30 40 2019 2030 SDS2030 NZE2050Gt CO₂Power End-use Transport Power BuildingsBehaviour change: IEA.
All rights reserved.Chapter 1 | Overview and key findings 57 1 1.16 If energy transitions are not secure, then they will not be rapid either The analysis in this Outlook makes clear wha t a huge task it would be to reach net -zero emissions, but also the benefits that this would bring.
It provides a pragmatic and clearheaded assessment of what this would require from the energy sector, focusing on the sorts of changes that would be requir ed over the next decade to 2030.
This involves a range of policies and technologies : there are no simple or single solutions that can deliver systemwide change.
In aiming for rapid energy transitions, however, adequate weight needs to be given to new and emerging risks to energy security; if not, then the process could well lose momentum and public confidence.
The process of change is being led by the electricity sector, where there are already multiple examples of what a virtuous circle of policy action a nd technology deployment can achieve.
For the same reason, electricity is also the arena where new risks are arising.
Changes in the shape and variability of electricity demand, alongside strong growth of variable solar PV and wind power, increase the need for flexibility in power system operation in all our scenarios: hour- to-hour ramping requirements are an important aspect of flexibility, and they are set to more than double in India over the next decade already in the STEPS, while also increasing by 50% in China.
Robust electricity networks , dispatchable power plants, storage technologies and demandresponse measures all play vital roles in meeting this increased demand, but they need appropriate regulation in order to play these roles effectively (see section 1.4).
In some countries, the speed of technological change, propelled in many cases by digital technologies, is significantly faster than institutional and regulatory change.
This could make systems more vulnerable to cyberattacks and expose consume rs to data privacy risks.
Traditional energy security concerns are unlikely to fade away, as suppliers and refiners of hydrocarbons try to adjust to changing patterns of demand and price as well as the social and economic strains caused by the pandemic.
It should not be taken for granted that the comparative advantage in energy of today's major oil and gas suppliers will disappear during rapid energy transitions, not least because of the opportunities they have to lead in technology areas such as CCUS or hydrogen supply ( IEA, 2020e ).
However, the process of change, and the fall in revenues that it implies, comes with the clear possibility of market volatility and disruptions.
Ensuring that clean energy technologies can rely on sufficient supplies of critica l minerals is another significant emerging challenge.
This applies to the manufacturing of batteries, where lithium, cobalt and nickel are essential to improvements in performance, as well as to the use of rare earth elements like neodymium in the magnets used in wind turbines and electric vehicles.
Clean energy technologies generally require more minerals than fossil fuel counterparts and, as their deployment picks up during energy transitions, this implies a significant increase in demand and, potentially, strains on supply.
There are geopolitical hazards too, given that the production (and refining, in some cases) of minerals and rare earth elements is quite highly concentrated.
For example, the Democratic Republic of the Congo accounts for some 70% of global cobalt production and China holds a dominant IEA.
58 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction position along the rare earth value chain, responsible for 85 -90% of the processing operations that convert rare earth elements into metals and magnets.
There would be many advantages to achieving net -zero emissions in terms of avoiding damage to the climate, improving air quality and energy access, and developing new industrial capacities.
If decisio n makers are alert to the risks, there need not be a trade -off between a rapid pace of change and the reliability of energy supply.
But there is a need for constant vigilance to ensure that the way forward is both sustainable and secure.
All rights reserved.Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 59 Chapter 2 An energy world in lockdown How has Covid -19 changed the game?
•The Covid -19 pandemic has introduced major new uncertainties for the energy sector and increased dramatically the range of pathways that it could follow.
The key questions include the duration of the pandemic, the shape of the recovery, and whether energy and sustainability are built into the strategies adopted by governments to kick -start their economies.
•The special circumstances of 2020 require a special approach in this World Energy Outlook .
The usual long -term modelling horizons are maintained, but th e focus is principally on the next ten years, exploring the impacts of the pandemic on the energy sector and the prospects for accelerated clean energy transitions .
Figure 2.1 ⊳ Key estimated energy demand, CO 2 emissions and investment indicators, 2020 relative to 2019 Resilient renewables output means the fall in emissions in 2020 is larger than the estimated 5% fall in energy demand, while investment plunges by 18% •Overall, we estimate that energy demand in 2020 is set to be 5% lower than in 2019 .
Since the most carbon -intensive fuels, coal and oil, are bearing the brunt of this demand reduction, and renewables are least affected, CO 2 emiss ions are set to fall by nearly 7%.
Capital investment in the energy sector is anticipated to fall by 18% in 2020, with the largest drop in spending on new oil and natural gas supply.
This slump in investment is likely to have major repercussions for energy markets in the coming years, even though the economic downturn is also putting downward pressure on demand.
The crisis is meanwhile provoking changes in the strategic orientation of companies and investors, as well as in consumer behaviour.-20% -15% -10% -5% 0% 5%Coal Gas Oil Nuclear Renewables Total energy demand CO₂ emissions Energy investmentSU MMARY IEA.
60 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction • There can be no single answer about where the energy world goes from here.
This World Energy Outlook ( WEO -2020) offers various scenarios, along with multiple sensitivity analyses and case studies, to explore the possible pathways.
• The Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) assumes that significant risks to public health are brought under control over the course of 2021, allowing for a steady recovery in economic activity.
This scenario incorporates our assessment of all today's policy ambitions and targets, including the energy components of announced stimulus and recovery packages and the Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement.
Broad energy and climate objectives set out by countries, including netzero targets for emissions, are incorporated in the ST EPS to the extent that they are backed up by specific policies and measures .
• The Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS) retains the initial policy assumptions of the STEPS but takes a more pessimistic view on the health and economic outlook.
In this scenario, a prolonged pandemic has deeper and longer lasting impacts on a range of economic, social and energy indicators than is the case in the STEPS; the global economy in 2040 is almost 10% smaller than in the STEPS.
• The Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) is based on the same economic and public health outlook as the STEPS, but it works backwards from shared long -term climate, clean air and energy access goals, examining what actions would be necessary to achieve those goals.
The near -term detail is drawn from the recent International Energy Agency ( IEA) Sustainable Recovery Plan, which boosts economies and employment while building cleaner and more resilient energy systems.
• The Net Zero Emissions by 2050 case (NZE2050) supplements the SDS analysis.
The SDS requ ires that many advanced economies reach net-zero emissions by 2050 at the latest.
The NZE2050 includes the first detailed IEA modelling of what would be needed over the next ten years to put CO 2 emissions on a pathway to net zero globally by 2050.
• In this edition, the fuel price outlook in the STEPS and SDS is lower than in the World Energy Outlook -2019 because of the dampening effect of the crisis on demand and supply costs.
However, although equilibrium prices are lower, the large drops in investment in 2 020 increase the possibility of new price cycles and volatility.
• This Outlook incorporates a continuous process of technology improvement and learning.
Its speed is linked to deployment, which therefore varies by scenario.
Cost trends reinforce policy preferences for low -carbon energy options, especially in the rapid energy transition scenarios, where the speed at which new technologies are introduced is as fast as has ever been seen in the history of energy (IEA, 2020a).
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 61 2 2.1 Overview The Covid -19 pandemic has dramatically altered the starting point for our analysis of the global energy outlook.
Amid the toll on human life, the lockdowns and the slump in economic activity, some of the energy developments in 2020 have been astonishing.
O il consumption in April was at a level last seen twenty years ago, while wind and solar photovoltaics (PV) suddenly accounted for a larger share of depressed electricity demand.
Some data points have never been seen before and may never be seen again, as when the May contract for West Texas Intermediate oil delivery closed at minus $38/barrel.
Populations in towns and cities also briefly experienced clearer skies and cleaner air.
The pandemic has dampened – at least temporarily – the capacity of many compan ies and households to invest, and has led to new policy initiatives and priorities in countries across the world.
It has also greatly increased uncertainties about the future.
These special circumstances dictate a special approach to this World Energy Outl ook (WEO) .
Our usual aim is to highlight long -term opportunities and risks relating to energy security and sustainability, as a way to inform decision makers as they consider options .
However, the current level of near -term uncertainty is much greater than usual.
With this in mind, the focus in this Outlook is primarily on the next ten years, in particular the potential pathways out of the current crisis and the opportunities for a sustainable recovery.
An essential first task, in this chapter, is to assess what has happened to the energy sector in 2020 and what new questions this raises for the future.
2.2 Energy and C ovid -19 pandemic The Covid -19 pandemic is far from over.
Although data quality varies widely, the seven -day rolling averages for new reported cases of the virus indicate that ebbs in some parts of the world are more than matched by flows in others ( Figure 2.2).
A handful of countries have seen a fall in reported cases from the peaks seen in the first -half of 2020, but the incidence of infections worldwide suggests that the struggle to get the spread of the virus under control could be long and drawn -out.
In these circumstances it is clearly still too early to make a definitive assessment of the way that the pand emic is set to evolve, or of its overall impact on the economic outlook or on energy trends.
The initial and most direct effects of the pandemic on energy consumption were felt during the broad lockdowns imposed in the first part of 2020.
Lockdowns involv ed stay -at-home orders for large categories of populations.
Detailed analysis in the IEA Global Energy Review (IEA, 2020b) showed that countries under strict lockdowns experienced a 25% reduction in energy consumption, while those in partial lockdown saw an 18% decline.
This effect was particularly strong in March and April, when countries responsible for over half of total global energy demand were subject to lockdowns of some kind ( Figure 2.3).
Figures and tables from this chapter are accessible through your IEA account : .
62 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction Figure 2.2 ⊳ New reported Covid-19 cases by region Reported new cases of Covid -19 infections continue to rise in many parts of the world Notes: C & S America = Central and South America.
Data show a seven -day rolling average.
Source: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC, 2020) accessed 21 September 2020.
Figure 2.3 ⊳ Share of global energy demand affected by full or partial lockdowns, 2020 Confinement measures had significant effects on energy use, especially for oil; their easing did not mark a return to pre -Covid patterns of energy use or an end to the pandemic Notes: C & S America = Central and South America.
The definition of a "full or partial" lockdown in a given jurisdiction is a restriction on non -essential movement for broad categories of the population, i.e.
more than closure of shops, restaurants, schools, etc.
Sources: IEA analysis based on Oxford Covid- 19 Government Response Tracker (Hale et al., 2020 ); UNESCO (2020); UNDESA (2019); and coronavirusmeasures.herokuapp.com, accessed 10 September 2020.
20 40 60 80 100 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug SepThousands of cases AfricaIndia Rest of AsiaC& SAmerica EurasiaMiddle EastNorth America ChinaEurope 10%20%30%40%50%60% Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug SepNorth America C & S America Europe Africa Middle East Eurasia India China Rest of Asia IEA.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 63 2 Even when strict measures were eased, most economies were in a twilight zone between lockdowns and a return to normality.
Social distancing provisions have typically rem ained in place, and restrictions have often continued to apply to places where people gather in close proximity (e.g.
restaurants, theatres, shopping centres, some workplaces).
This has continued to depress economic activity, especially in countries where the services sector accounts for a high share of output and employment (IMF, 2020a).
Moreover, in an increasing number of cases, subsequent rises in infections have brought a re-imposition of more stringent restrictions.
In India, for example, a lengthy n ational lockdown that started in late March was gradually eased in June and July, but some higher risk areas such as the western state of Maharashtra (one of India's largest industrial and financial hubs with a population of around 125 million) subsequently returned to stricter measures in order to curb a rise in cases and to prevent the local health system from being overwhelmed.
Local and more targeted restrictions have been put in place in many other countries in response to surges in the number of new C ovid -19 cases.
The pandemic has affected consumer preferences and behaviour in ways that go beyond formal restrictions.
Initial lockdowns were unambiguous in bringing down overall energy consumption (for oil in particular), but their easing has pushed energy use in different directions.
The increase in working from home, for example, reduced demand for mobility, but evidence from navigation software providers suggests that, when people began to travel again as lockdowns eased, they often tended to pre fer p ersonal vehicles over public transport.
In mid- July in New York City, one month after the easing of lockdown, road traffic was 20% higher than usual, while use of public transport was down by almost 60%.
The pandemic has also had broad economic impacts.
Companies with weakened balance sheets and uncertain demand prospects have cut activity and investment, and a sharp rise in unemployment has been combined with a slump in disposable incomes.
The forecast contraction in the global economy from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) steadily worsened over the first half of the year ( Figure 2.4).
Some of the worst impacts have been in countries and among groups that can least afford it, with low -skilled workers without the option to work from home especially vulnerable.
Job losses have extended to the energy sector: we estimate that more than 3 million energy jobs (from the 40 million directly provided by various parts of the energy sector) are at risk or have already been los t. The decline in fossil fuel consumption during lockdowns led to a significant fall in emissions.
This brought a major improvement in air quality, noted by many urban inhabitants.
However, given that carbon dioxide (CO 2) concentrations in the atmosphere a ccumulate over many decades, a one -year decline in CO 2 emissions1 of around 2.
4 gigatonnes (Gt), to just over 3 3 Gt, can hardly in itself be considered a game -changer, especially since nearly all of the decline has been due to a slump in economic activity rather than major structural changes in energy production or use.
Where and when economic activity has picked up – as it did for example in China from the second -quarter of 2020 – CO 2 emissions have bounced back.
1 CO 2 emissions refer to energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions.
64 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction Figure 2.4 ⊳ Evolution of global GDP forecasts for 2020 and historical context The slump in the global economy in 2020 is set to be the worst for 70 years, with further downside risks if there are new Covid- 19 outbreaks Note: GDP = gross domestic product; IMF = International Monetary Fund.
Sources: IEA analysis based on IMF World Economic Outlook (IMF 2020a, 2020b, 2020c ); Maddison Project Database (2018).
The amount of money flowing into the energy sector has fallen sharply due to a combination of lower demand and significantly lower prices (Box 2.1 ).
Spending on energy in 2020 by end -consumers – households and companies – is anticipated to fall by $1.25 trillion, or almost 20 %, compared with 2019, with spending on oil products falling so precipitously that it is set to dip below the amount spent on electricity for the first time.
This is causing major difficulties for go vernments that depend on hydrocarbon sales for budgetary revenues.
We estimate that net income from oil and gas in the Middle East, for example, may fall by more than half in 2020, and year -on-year declines in net income for African producers on average ar e likely to be closer to 75%.
Box 2.1 ⊳ Prices tell the story of a turbulent year The abrupt decline in energy demand in 2020 resulted in some very unusual price signals in different parts of the world.
The most visible instance was in oil markets in April, when the scale of the collapse in oil demand was well in excess of the industry's immediate capacity to adjust; this created huge pressure on oil logistics, storage and prices.
Oil prices have rebounded since April as demand started to recover amid a series of administrative and market -driven cuts to supply.
But prices across different natural gas markets remain extremely atypical.
In normal times, differences between regional natural gas prices reflect the cost of moving gas from resource -rich regions to -10%-5%0%5%10% 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020Recession periods Annual change in GDP IMF January 2020 IMF April 2020 IMF June 2020 IMF April 2020 longer outbreak IEA.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 65 2 net-importing ones.
But a glut of available international supply, which was star ting to become visible even before the pandemic hit, caused these differentials in spot price indices to disappear in 2020.
At times, gas traded at Europe's Title Transfer Facility (TTF) hub was as cheap as gas at the US Henry Hub, removing the economic in centive to ship liquefied natural gas (LNG) across the Atlantic.
Figure 2.5 ⊳ Selected fossil fuel prices in 2019-2020 Changes in energy prices to mid- 2020 reflected extreme market circumstances and have also played an essential role in bringing markets back into balance Notes: MBtu = million British thermal units; LNG = liquefied natural gas.
With the exception of the LNG import price in Asia, which is a weighted average of data for Japan, Korea, Chinese Taipei and China, natural gas prices are weekly averaged daily spot prices: Henry Hub (US); Netherlands TTF (Europe) and EAX MA (Asia).
The oil price is the Brent spot price: coal is Northwest Europe (ARA).
Sources : US EIA (2020) ; IHS Energy (2020); Argus Global LNG (2020) ; ICIS LNG Edge (2020) .
The only natural gas prices that were not immediately affected were those with a contractual link to oil prices, which are adjusted only with a six to nine -month time lag (meaning that they are now falling in the second -half of the year).
Natural gas delivered to Asia under these terms – 70% of gas imported to Asia – was the most expensive internationally traded fossil fuel for much of 2020.
Elsewhere, however, cheaper spot market gas provided extremely stiff price competition for coal.
Investment in the energy sector is anticipated to decline by 18%, a record fall that is much larger in percentage terms than the decline in energy demand ( IEA, 2020 c).
Investment activity in all parts of the energy economy was affected by disrupted supply chains and by restrictions on the movement of people and goods during lockdowns, but the main pressure on spending has come from weakened corporate balance sheets and uncertainties over future demand, notably for oil and gas.
Investment in oil and gas supply in 2020 is expected to be one- third lower than in 2019.
2 4 6 8 10 12 Jan19 May19 Sep19 Jan20 May20 Sep20Dollars per MBtu Oil Coal United States Europe Asia Actual averageNatural gas LNG import Asia IEA.
66 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction 2.2.1 Impacts by fuel and technology Oil Oil markets are gradually stabilising after a torrid first -half of 2020.
During lockdowns, governments directly constrained aspects of mobility to stop the spread of the virus, and this had dramatic effects on oil consumption in two sectors – road transport and aviation – that account for nearly 60% o f oil use.
The supply side was initially slow to react to the dramatic drop in demand, but this changed in April and May when agreement on deep administratively -driven cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)+ grouping was accompanied by a strong market -driven supply response to plunging prices and revenues ( Figure 2.6).
Figure 2.6 ⊳ Liquids demand and supply in 2020 relative to 2015-2019 The oil supply response initially lagged the collapse in demand, putting enormous pressure on available oil storage space, before markets started to rebalance in the second- quarter Note s: mb/d = million barrels per day.
Both supply and demand include biofuels (in physical volumes); supply also includes processing gains.
The differences between supply and demand reflect net additions to or withdrawals from inventories.
From historic lows in April, oil prices started to rise again as consumption picked up and as strong supply cuts took effect.
However, the shadow of the pandemic still looms large over oil markets.
The rebound in road transport activity has varied widely by country and the aviation sector remains very subdued; overall demand looks set to be down by around 8 million barrels per day (mb/d) year- on-year.
The blow to the industry has been profound, most visibly in the cuts made to investment and employment.
The refining sector is al so feeling the strain, with a new wave of refinery closures on the cards as new capacity from a surge in investment in recent years collides with a depressed market.
70 80 90 100 110 Jan July Decmb/d 2015-19 range 2019 2020Liquids demand Jan July DecLiquids supply IEA.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 67 2 High -frequency indicators: how are real -time sources of data changing our understanding of energy?
The Covid -19 pandemic has brought into focus the way that the world of energy data is changing.
Conventional channels for collecting energy statistics all come with a significant time lag and so were poorly equipped to capture the sharp changes that occurred as the pandemic spread.
Attention turned instead to the increasing wealth of up-to-the-minute information available from various sources, which provided some of the most reliable and timely insights into the energy and economic impacts of the pandemic.
Navigation software providers have provided close to real -time mobility data, aggregating information from car navigation systems and mobile phones.
These were found to be strongly correlated with gasoline demand.
Aviation indicat ors are also available with only a short time lag, and these have been widely used to track jet fuel demand, the most seriously affected component of the energy system.
Figure 2.7 ⊳ Year -on-year change in weekly electricity demand in selected countries, 2020 Analysis of real -time data shows how electricity demand dropped quickly with confinement measures, with a steady recovery as they are eased Note: Data have been weather corrected.
Sources: IEA analysis based on RTE (France), TERNA (Italy), REE (Spain), ELEXON (UK) – accessed via the ENTSO -E Transparency Platform; Bundesnetzagentur | SMARD.de (Germany), POSOCO (India).
In the case of oil, these indirect indicators were used to assess both energy use and economic activity.
However, in the case of electricity a more direct approach was possible because transmission system operators in some countries provide almost -30%-20%-10%0%10% Full lockdown Pre and post full lockdownGermany Italy SpainUnited KingdomIndia FranceJan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug SepSPOTLIGHT IEA.
68 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction real-time data on elect ricity consumption.
The raw data is heavily affected by seasonality and weather impacts and needs to be adjusted with the appropriate statistical techniques ( Figure 2.7).
Once adjusted, however, such data provided rapid and valuable insights into how lockdowns and the subsequent loosening of restrictions were affecting the economy, helping policy makers to design fiscal and monetary responses to the crisis.
Electricity data are published only at a system level, but can provide deeper understanding of underlying changes to the extent that the data can be disaggregated by various consumer segm ents.
This is a rich area for analysis, given that the crisis led to a sharp decline in electricity consumption in the services sector during lockdowns but also to an increase in household electricity use (IEA, 2020b) .
The latter included, for example, a noticeable increase in midday residential air conditioning use from May in some markets, reflecting a rise in the number of people wo rking from home.
Such real -time data and insights are part of a broader trend.
The use of satellite data is an especially rich and fast -moving area, in particular when combined with machine learning techniques.
Aerial observations now are routinely used to track energy cargoes and storage levels, as well as to monitor operating conditions for a variety of energy facilities and infrastructure.
Satellite data can help to infer emissions levels of CO 2, air pollutants and methane from different kinds of observa ble plumes; they can also assist in mapping cost -effective approaches to expanding energy access.
These new sources of data are far from sufficient to put together a comprehensive picture of global energy use.
Assembling all the wealth of country and secto ral detail that we need to populate the IEA World Energy Model remains a painstaking and lengthy process, the bedrock of which is the IEA's long -standing work on data collection and quality with official statistical bodies around the world.
Indeed the use of new data sources (and methods) should be seen as a complement to more traditional survey -based methods, facilitating validation and allowing for preliminary estimates .
But the availability of complementary sources of real -time data in different areas is rising fast, and has come of age in the exceptional circumstances of 2020.
Electricity Global electricity demand is anticipated to fall by around 2% in 2020, but in many ways – especially for households – the crisis has reinforced the central position of electricity in modern life.
Reliable electricity in combination with modern communication technologies has provided a crucial safety net for social interaction, as well as for many areas of economic life.
Electricity data have also provided a useful barom eter of economic activity, almost real -time in some cases ( see Spotlight).
The dip in electricity use has varied by country.
Some of the largest impacts were in economies, such as India or in Europe, that experienced lengthy lockdowns, or in countries such as the United States and Brazil where services make up a large share of the economy.
By contrast, electricity demand in China is set to rise by almost 2% in 2020.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 69 2 On the electricity supply side, the position of renewables across all major regions has bee n buttressed by their low operating costs and priority access to the grid.
Coal -fired power generation has borne the brunt of the reduction in demand for electricity, although other thermal sources have also been affected.
This shift consolidated the position of renewables and nuclear power (combined) ahead of coal -fired power generation in the global mix.
The crisis has also provided a real -time experiment in managing the operational implications of higher shares of variable renewables.
Many countries have seen record contributions from wind and solar PV in 2020 while maintaining grid stability, which has boosted confidence and experience.
Figure 2.8 ⊳ Change in electricity demand by region Electricity has been growing twice as fast as total energy demand in recent years, and its estimated 2% fall in in 2020 is less than half that of overall energy demand Note: TWh = terawatt -hours; 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Natural gas After a remarkable 5.3% increase in 2018, global gas demand in 2019 grew by 1.8% and is set to fall in 2020 by about 3%.
This constitutes a disruptive turnaround for an industry that has been geared to dynamic growth.
Some elements of this slowdown were visible even before the spread of the pandemic, as a mild winter reduced demand for gas for heating across much of the northern hemisphere.
But lockdowns and the economic slump curbed gas use further, with lower demand from commercial and industrial consumers and the call on gas -fired power also ebbing in many countries.
The decline in natural gas demand was not sharp enough to cause the same immediate pressures on producers and inventories as seen in oil markets (althou gh it did lead to a collapse in spot prices, as described in Box 2.1 ).
However, by the second -half of 2020, available gas storage was running short and supply restraint was increasingly visible in cancelled LNG shipment s – notably from the United States – and reduced pipeline -4%-2%0%2%4%6% - 600- 3000 300 600 900 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020eTWhRest of world Brazil India China European Union United States Average annual change in global electricity demand (right axis) IEA.
70 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction shipments, mainly from Russia.
Amid a broader fall in oil and gas investment, the flow of new LNG project approvals dried up.
After a record year for new approvals in 2019, led by the United States, Russia and Mozambique, no new LNG supply is likely to get the green light in 2020.
Coal Despite not being used for transport, coal has vied with oil as the fuel most affected by the pandemic; coal use is anticipated to fall by about 7% in 2020.
Almost tw o-thirds of coal use is for power generation.
Coal -fired power often was the marginal source of generation that was scaled back when electricity consumption declined.
This effect was particularly evident in Europe and North America, where natural gas prices were exceptionally low.
This led not only to lower utilisation of coal -fired plants but also to some early retirements, with permanent effects on the outlook for coal demand.
In India, the average utilisation rate of its coal -fired capacity fell below 50 %.
The implications for coal would have been more severe without the economic rebound in China, which put a floor under the drop in global coal demand.
China accounts for more than half of global coal use, and the latest indications are that coal demand in China did not decline in 2020 (a trend that also limits the decline in global CO 2 emissions).
Approvals of new coal -fired power capacity – predominantly in China – were progressing at a faster rate in the first -half of 2020 than in 2019, although still almost 80% down from the high point in 2014.
Figure 2.9 ⊳ Change in renewables and nuclear power generation and fossil fuel demand by region, 2019-2020 Renewable s and nuclear power sources of power generation, led by wind and solar PV, are among the very few indicators showing growth in 2020 compared with 2019 Note s: TWh = terawatt -hours; Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent.
Renewables generation include bioenergy, hydropower, solar PV, wind and other renewables.
-400 -300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300Gas Oil CoalFossil fuel demand Mtoe-400 -300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300 Advanced economies China India Other developing Asia Middle East Rest of worldRenewables and nuclear power generation TWh IEA.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 71 2 Renewables Renewable sources of energy have proven relatively resilient to the effects of the Covid -19 crisis.
However, there are important distinctions to be made between different technologies.
Renewable sources of electricity (up more than 5% year -on-year) have fared considerably better than renewables used directly in end -use sectors (down 2%).
Among the direct uses, biofuels were hit hard by the overall drop in demand for liquid fuels.
Utility -scale renewables projects have generally been insulated from the worst effects of the decline in electricity demand.
Many of these projects have a degree of reve nue certainty due to long -term power purchase agreements and full or partial price guarantees, as well as priority access to the grid due to low operational costs or regulations granting priority access.
However, smaller scale distributed projects, such as rooftop solar, have been much more vulnerable.
These projects rely heavily on spending by households and small businesses, which has fallen back.
The ability of solar providers to access premises and install new panels has also been hindered by the crisis .
Nuclear Nuclear power has been affected by the fall in electricity demand – we estimate a 4.5% fall in output for 2020 as a whole compared with 2019.
However, from an operational point of view , nuclear reactors performed well during the lockdowns, providing an important source of flexibility in many markets.
Alongside the drop in demand, permanent facility closures explain part of the fall in output.
In advanced economies, twelve reactors closed in the second -half of 2019 and the first -half of 2020, while one started construction.
Reduced operating revenue also undermined the case for investing in operating extensions for existing nuclear facilities.
China is one of the few regions that are on track to see an increase in year -on-year generation from nuclear power in 2020, mainly due to full -year operation of two large reactors that started in June 2019, as well as output from another reactor that began operation in August 2020.
Energy efficiency Reductions in spending by households and companies as a result of the pandemic translate into a slowdown in the replacement of goods by new and more energy -efficient models.
If such a situation were to be prolonged, this would lead to an energy system that is over reliant on existing capital stock and outdated techn ologies.
The latest data suggest, for example, that sales of new cars will be more than 10% lower in 2020 than in 2019, slowing the turnover of the car stock.
The economic attractiveness of fuel -efficient cars is also being affected by the fall in fuel prices.
However, electric vehicle sales are holding up reasonably well, and seem likely to be slightly higher in 2020 than the previous year.
Any reduction in the rate of improvement in energy efficiency would be very detrimental to the prospects for successf ul energy transitions, and t he way in which energy efficiency mandates and incentives are built into recovery strategies will play a large part in determining the future uptake of more efficient goods.
72 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction 2.3 Which way from here?
2.3.1 New questions and uncertainties The Covid -19 pandemic underlines why long -term energy analysis needs to be scenariobased.
As this Outlook series has stated many times, there is not a single storyline about the future of energy and the IEA has never held a single view.
Instead there are m ultiple possible energy futures and the aim of the WEO scenarios and analysis is to illustrate how the development of energy systems might be affected by changing some of the key variables.
The events of 2020 have increased the range of plausible outcomes considerably by multiplying near -term uncertainties.
I n this section, we look at six critical areas, each of which has implications for the way that we approach this year's WEO scenarios.
Duration of the pandemic and the shape of the economic recovery Major uncertainties remain concerning the duration and se verity of the health emergency and accompanying economic slump.
Clearly these two issues are linked: the depth of the global recession is related to the time that it takes to bring the pandemic under control.
There will also be large country -by-country variations in outcomes.
These are related in part to the extent of domestic outbreaks of the virus, but also depend on variables such as the relative importance to different countries of disruption to global value chains, of tourism as a source of income and employment, and of falls in commodity prices.
There may also be long -lasting social and economic impacts from the pandemic as a result of decreased investment, effects of higher unemployment on human capital, and damage to a range of public services and institutions: these too will vary from country to country.
Strategies adopted by governments to kick -start economies The immediate policy priority for governments around the world has been to contain the spread of the virus and mitigate the short -term econo mic impacts.
In practice, capacity to act effectively in these areas varies widely, in part for fiscal reasons but also because of institutional and structural factors.
For example, the World Bank estimates that, in an average emerging market and developing economy, informal activity accounts for one -third of economic output and more than two -thirds of employment; this activity is largely outside the reach of direct government support (World Bank, 2019).
As countries look beyond immediate economic and finan cial relief towards strategies for economic recovery, a key question is the extent to which energy and sustainability are incorporated into their plans.
This issue was considered in detail in the IEA's recent Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Spec ial Report (IEA, 2020d), which identified ways to address the core imperatives to boost economies and employment while also taking up the challenge of building cleaner and more secure energy systems.
The decisions that countries take will have major consequences for the energy outlook, but the plans of many countries are still at a formative stage.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 73 2 Risks for energy investment The slump in energy investment in 2020 represents a warning sign for the future.
It reflects the fact that the pandemic is leaving companies, financial institutions and households with weaker balance sheets, higher debts and a high degree of uncertainty about the future.
A persistent downturn in energy investment would entail multiple potential risks: it would be likely to limit the a bility of many economies to meet their development objectives; to slow the structural transformation of the energy sector; and to create the possibility of new price cycles and volatility in fuel markets.
There is also the possibility of distinct regional variations in investment trends between the major economies, where capital is generally readily available and the cost of borrowing remains generally low, and some emerging market and developing economies, where the availability and cost of capital may cha nge for the worse ( Box 2.2 ).
Box 2.2 ⊳ Will access to finance determine who gets to "build back better"?
One of the most malign implications of the pandemic may well turn out to be an increase in global inequality.
Various factors make lower income populations more vulnerable to the immediate impact of the crisis, including limited access to healthcare, protective equipment and education.
As countries start to emerge from the crisis, they have an opportunity to "build back better" by creating more inclusive, resilient and sustainable societies.
Access to finance will be critical in determining their ability to step up investments that support these objectives.
However, the pandemic is exacerbating pre-crisis imbalances in the cost and availability of capital.
Many major economies are set for an extended period of very low borrowing costs, due to structural factors as well as monetary policies.
This would extend a trend already visible in recent years, during which lower government benchmark rates have put downward pressure on the cost of long -term debt and equity financing in the United States and Europe, as well as in China and India.
For investments based on US dollar or euro cash flows, this has resulted in risk -free rates less than 1%.
However, sovereign risks to investing have risen in a number of emerging market and developing economies, where monetary policy options are more limited.
Equity market risk premiums – the extra return required in a given market – have also increased in many cases.
These indicators do not yet stand out from a historical perspective, but the potential for further economic fallout means that they may worsen in the coming months.
In advance of the crisis, debt levels in emerging market and developing economies had already risen to a record 170% of GDP in 2019 ( Kose et al., 2020 ) and the headwinds are now getting stronger.
These financing trends represent a significant risk to the energy outlook in emerging market and developing economies, which account for the bulk of projected spending needs in all of our scenarios.
In countries such as South Africa, Indonesia and Brazil, the IEA.
74 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction changes in financing indicators observed in the first -half of 2020 would translate into a 10-25% increase in generation costs for a new onshore wind farm investment, depending on local conditions (Figure 2.10).
Figure 2.10 ⊳ Changes in cost of capital macro indicators for selected countries, 2019-2020, and their indicative impact on the levelised cost of new onshore wind Although government bond rates have moved lower in some countries, rising economic risks are translating into higher financing costs, especially in developing economies Notes: LCOE = levelised cost of electricity; MWh = megawatt -hour.
Data for cost of capital indicators are based on the av erage change in the first- half of 2020 compared to the 2019 annual average.
D ebt and equity market risk premiums represent the additional return over the risk -free rate (expressed here as ten-year government bond yields) required by investors to invest in the debt and equity securities of a given market.
Premiums are based on economy- wide changes and a 70:30 debt -equity capital structure.
The challenges are particularly visible for some state -owned enterprises (SOEs).
In many developing economies, SOEs are responsible for the bulk of energy investment and their financing terms are typically tied to the borrowing costs of their governments, a number of which have recently seen their borrowing costs go up.
Compounding a difficult situation, some SOEs in addition have borrowed heavily in foreign currency (e.g.
Although initial sharp currency movements from the crisis have moderated somewhat, a number of SOEs now face debt repayments over the next few years up to 25% higher in domestic currency terms than in prepandemic conditions, alongside more uncertain revenues.
Not all countries and actors are facing the same constraints: in China, domestic bank lending to households and non -financial companies has been growing at double -digit rates in 2020.
China's SOEs enjoy structural financing advantages over private companies and this edge has been reinforced by the crisis: SOEs accounted for over -2% 0% 2% 4%United StatesGermanyChinaJapanIndonesiaMexicoIndiaBrazilSouth Africa Government bond Debt risk premium Equity risk premiumChange in cost of capital macro indicators -8 0 8 16 Dollars per MWhImpact on LCOE for new onshore wind IEA.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 75 2 90% of corporate bonds issued in the first -quarter of 2020, with relatively low borrowing cos ts compared to those available for private companies (Fitch Ratings, 2020).
That said, non -performing loan ratios in China remain near five -year highs, with default risks representing a growing potential constraint to inclusive and sustainable lending by b anks.
Implications for energy costs and prices The Covid -19 crisis has brought down prices of all fossil fuels.
Given the overhang of supply in many markets and the uncertainty over how quickly demand will rebound, near -term prices could remain low for some time (although the slump in investment also c reates the risk of volatility further down the road).
Renewable energy technologies in the power sector are less vulnerable than fossil fuels to downward pressure on price, but low -carbon fuels face challenging market conditions.
One important uncertainty concerns whether and how governments respond to these changes.
In the absence of countervailing policy action, low fuel prices could affect consumer choices, for example by tipping the scales against more efficient choices for a range of appliances and equipment.
Although governments are understandably wary of adding to consumer bills, the drop in fuel prices could facilitate the removal of fossil fuel subsidies in some markets once the immediate emergency is past, and potentially the introduction of carbon pricing in others.
Changes in company strategies Company strategies are being affected not only by the strains on balance sheets but also, at least for many publicly listed companies, by an upswing in investor focus on environmental, social and corporate governance factors.
A proliferation of sustainability initiatives and commitments includes pledges from a growing number of companies to reach net -zero emissions by 2050.
C ompanies are likely to come under growing pressure from investors and other stakeh olders to explain how they are implementing these commitments through their decarbonisation strategies and investment decisions.
The Covid -19 crisis has also sparked discussions about vulnerabilities in long, complex supply chains, which could lead to a relocation of some industrial facilities and knock -on effects on demand for long -distance transportation.
This could potentially lead to lower demand for transport of some transformed goods, but more trade in raw materials.
Changes in consumer attitudes and behaviour On the consumer side, the pandemic has already set in motion some important changes in behaviour which look likely to influence the future of work (more working from home), the future of retail (more online shopping), the design of urban areas and the evolution of urban mobility patterns (shifts between public transport, private vehicles and cycling) and the intersection of electricity and digitalisation.
Changes in behaviour could also influence IEA.
76 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction the outlook for a range of sectors from plastics to aviation.
The pandemic might also lead to changes in the level o f popular support for low -carbon policies in ways that are hard to predict.
The nature and extent of these changes will depend to a large extent on the duration of the pandemic and the way that choices are shaped by policies, but they could have disruptive implications for the energy sector.
2.3.2 Designing the scenarios The pandemic is affecting all the main variables around which our energy scenarios are constructed: economic growth, demographic s, policies, prices and investment.
It is also influencing other factors, such as geopolitics and the prospects for international cooperation, which we do not model explicitly but which can have a profound impact on the future.
These new uncertainties have led to changes in the design of the WEO -2020 scenarios and the focus of the analysis.
Scenarios The Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) is designed to give feedback to today's decision makers about the course that they are on, based on stated policy ambitio ns.
In the near term, this scenario is based on the assumption that continued significant risks to public health are brought under control by public authorities over the course of 2021.
This produces a steady, albeit far from V -shaped, recovery in economic activity.
This scenario incorporates our assessment of a range of stated policy ambitions, including the energy components of announced stimulus or recovery packages (as of mid -2020) and the Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement.
The policy landscape in the STEPS is modelled in detail at the sectoral level.
Broad energy and environmental objectives (including country net -zero targets) are not automatically assumed to be met.
They are implemented in this scenario to the extent that they are backed up by specific announced policies and measures in the relevant parts of the energy sector.
Based on the announcements made thus far, policies designed to boost recovery from the current crisis do not generally have a strong energy or sustainability component, with the notable exception of those in Europe, Canada and a small number of other countries.
2 The STEPS also reflects progress with the implementation of corporate sustainability commitments, particularly in the outlook for industrial energy use and emissions, and in the prospects for renewable electricity.
Ordinarily, the Current Policies Scenario provides a baseline for our scenario analysis by outlining a future in which no new policies are added to those already in place.
It is diffic ult 2 The Stated Policies and the Delayed Recovery scenarios include only those energy- related provisions of recovery packages that have been announced as of mid -2020.
However, in the Sustainable Development Scenario and the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 case, all countries are assumed to implement the key measures of the Sustainable Recovery Plan outlined in Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report (IEA, 2020d), IEA.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 77 2 to imagine this "business -as-usual" approach prevailing in today's circumstances, so we have not included the Current Policies Scenario in the overall scenario design for the WEO2020 .
That said, we would warn against taking the STEPS as a baseline or reference case.
Achieving stated policies should not be taken for granted, especially in countries and sectors where they are ambitious and far reaching.
The Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) provides a way to explore the impacts of more far -reaching changes in policies.
The key outcomes that this scenario delivers are drawn from the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals: effective action to combat climate change by holding the rise in global average temperature to "well below 2 °C … and pursuing efforts to limit [it] to 1.5 °C", as set out in the Paris Agreement; universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services by 2030; and a substantial reduction in air pollution.
As in previous WEO editions, this scenario works back from the achievement of these outcomes and assesses what combination of actions would be required to achieve them.
However, there is much more detail in this edition than in previous ones on the near -term policy measures that would put the world on course to achieve the envisaged outcomes.
This detail is drawn from the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan (IEA, 2020d), which sets out cost-effective measures to help revitalise economies while creating jobs and bu ilding cleaner and most resilient energy systems.
The updated SDS gets its initial impetus from the realisation of these measures, which span six key sectors: electricity, transport, industry, buildings, fuels and emerging low -carbon technologies.
To allow for meaningful comparison of the energy drivers and outcomes between the scenarios, the underlying assumptions on public health and economic growth in the SDS are the same as in the STEPS.
The SDS incorporates the most ambitious climate objectives and targets being considered by governments around the world and relies on their full implementation, alongside rapid and wholesale changes in all other parts of the energy system.
As a result, many of the advanced economies reach net -zero emissions by 2050, or e arlier in some cases, and global emissions are on course to reach net zero by 2070 .
This puts the world firmly on track to limit the temperature rise to well below 2 °C, and it limits the temperature rise to 1.5 °C in 2100 on the assumption that negative e missions technologies a re deployed in the secondhalf of the century (at levels towards the lower end of the range seen in scenarios assessed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).
If the possibility of a large level of net -negative emissions ( i.e.
net removal of CO 2 from the atmosphere ) is ruled out, then CO 2 emissions would need to fall to zero globally by 2050 to have a 50% chance of limiting the temperature rise to 1.5 °C (IPCC, 2018).
With this in mind, we have also conducted detailed modelling and constructed a new case – called the Net Zero Emissions 2050 case ( NZE2050) – to examine what more would be needed over the next ten years to put global CO 2 emissions on a pathway to net zero by 2050.
78 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction There is a possibility that the health and economic assumptions that underpin the Stated Policies and Sustainable Development scenarios will prove to be too pessimistic, particularly in the event that highly effective therapeutics or vaccine s for Covid -19 are found and produced quickly.
However, there is also a significant chance that they prove to be too optimistic.
With this in mind, the main sensitivity case examined in this Outlook is a downside one.
In our Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS) , we assume health and economic outcomes consistent with prolonged outbreaks of Covid- 19 that continue throughout 2021 and beyond, with vaccines either not proving effective or not engendering public confidence, and with the periodic re -imposition of restricti ve measures in any part of the world that sees a surge in infections.
The Covid -19 virus weighs much more heavily on human interactions and on economic activity in the DRS than in the STEPS, and the effects on economic growth, company strategies and consumer behaviour are deeper and longer lasting.
Governments struggle to extend financial support measures amid lower tax revenues and higher debt, exposing households and companies to even greater strains.
The initial energy policy assumptions in the DRS are t he same as those in the STEPS; but the capital available to realise transformative policy ambitions is more constrained.
Economic outlook The Stated Policies and Sustainable Development scenarios are based on macroeconomic outlooks that are broadly consis tent with the latest assessments from the IMF.
The pandemic triggers a sharp recession in 2020, with a global GDP decline of 4.6%.
Where feasible, governments and central banks respond with large -scale fiscal stimulus programmes and monetary expansion so a s to maintain financial stability and limit negative spillovers.
Social distancing measures and eventually a vaccine enable a gradual recovery of the services sector.
Box 2.3 ⊳ Demographic trends The global population in our scenarios rises from around 7 .7 billion in 2019 to over 9 billion in 2040, in line with the median variant of the United Nations projections (UNDESA , 2019).
The overall demographic outlook is held constant between scenarios, although we vary slightly the urban -rural split in the DRS to reflect the reduced pull of urbanisation in this scenario.
Around half of the increase in the global population is in Africa and around another one -third is in emerging economies in Asia.
India becomes the world's most populous country.
The future rate of global population growth slows notably compared with the recent past, due in large part to falling global fertility rates as average incomes rise.
The longterm demographic effects of the pandemic are uncertain, although it could be associated in some co untries with a break in the trend towards longer global life expectancy, either because of direct health impacts (Clark et al., 2020 ) or indirectly because of an increase in global poverty.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 79 2 The implications of the pandemic and economic slump are significant, particularly in some emerging market and developing economies.
The supply side effects, however, are limited by the relatively short duration of the crisis together with effective policy responses, and the trend growth in global GDP after 2022 returns to close to the pre -pandemic rate.
The fall in GDP and large deficits lead to a major increase in government debt, but low interest rates and resumed growth make this manageable.
Beyond the medium -term horizon, the increasing capacity utilisation of the economy enables a normalisation of monetary conditions.
While there are some measures in the interests of resilience to ensure self-sufficiency in specific value chains, notably for some kinds of medical equipment, global trade and investment flows are broadly maintained.
Table 2.1 ⊳ Real GDP average growth assumptions by region and scenario STEPS/SDS DRS 2010- 19 2019- 25 2025- 40 2019- 40 2019- 40 North America 2.3% 1.4% 2.0% 1.9% 1.4% United States 2.3% 1.3% 1.9% 1.7% 1.4% Central and South America 1.0% 1.8% 3.1% 2.7% 2.2% Brazil 0.7% 1.2% 3.1% 2.6% 2.0% Europe 1.9% 1.4% 1.5% 1.5% 1.1% European Union 1.6% 1.2% 1.3% 1.3% 0.9% Africa 3.1% 2.6% 4.4% 3.9% 3.5% South Africa 1.5% 1.0% 2.8% 2.3% 1.9% Middle East 2.2% 1.1% 3.1% 2.5% 2.1% Eurasia 2.2% 1.6% 2.1% 2.0% 1.6% Russia 1.6% 1.2% 1.6% 1.5% 1.1% Asia Pacific 5.5% 4.2% 3.9% 4.0% 3.5% China 7.2% 4.9% 3.6% 4.0% 3.6% India 6.6% 4.5% 5.7% 5.4% 4.9% Japan 1.0% 0.7% 0.9% 0.8% 0.6% Southeast Asia 5.1% 4.2% 4.1% 4.2% 3.6% World 3.4% 2.7% 3.1% 3.0% 2.6% Notes: Calculated based on GDP expressed in year -2019 US dollars in purchasing power parity terms.
The same GDP assumptions are used for both the STEPS and SDS.
Sources: IEA analysis based on Oxford Economics (2020); IMF (2020 a, 2020 b).
The Delayed Recover y Scenario, by contrast, reflects the risk of a longer and more serious epidemic which blunts the effectiveness of macroeconomic policy responses.
Extended social distancing measures and other restrictive measures lead to a sharp drop in GDP, and the globa l economy in 2021 is still smaller than in 2019.
Governments respond, but skyrocketing debt and political constraints limit the effectiveness of fiscal stimulus, while a private sector debt overhang and weak confidence constrain the effect of monetary IEA.
80 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction expa nsion.
Ultra -low interest rates persist for several years without a strong stimulus impact.
With recurring outbreaks of infection across the world, the services sector has a very weak and gradual recovery, and this leads to persistent unemployment.
A combi nation of high unemployment and fragile financial positions depress es consumer confidence and affect s demand and investment even in sectors not directly hit by the pandemic.
Constrained global trade and investment flows lead to further efficiency losses.
Economic disruption and high levels of debt, together with stranded human and physical capital, especially in the services sector, causes long -term damage to economic growth.
Energy and carbon prices The equilibrium prices for fuels have been revised down from those in the WEO -2019 because of the dampening effect of the crisis on demand, and because of changes to strategies and cost structures on the supply side.
However, although prices are lower, the possibility of price volatility and of new price cycles has risen.
Table 2.2 ⊳ Fossil fuel prices by scenario Stated Policies Sustainable Development Delayed Recovery Real terms ($2019) 2010 2019 2025 2030 2035 2040 2025 2040 2025 2040 IEA crude oil ($/barrel) 91 63 71 76 81 85 57 53 59 72 Natural gas ($/MBtu) United States 5.1 2.6 3.5 3.5 3.8 4.2 2.1 2.0 3.2 3.7 European Union 8.7 6.7 6.7 7.5 7.9 8.3 4.8 4.9 6.3 7.6 China 7.8 8.2 8.4 8.3 8.5 8.8 6.0 6.4 7.9 8.2 Japan 12.9 10.1 9.2 8.9 8.9 9.0 5.4 5.7 8.4 8.5 Steam coal ($/tonne) United States 60 46 53 44 47 50 37 32 48 44 European Union 108 61 66 71 70 69 57 55 60 64 Japan 125 84 77 79 78 77 68 61 71 71 Coastal China 135 92 83 83 82 79 73 67 76 73 Notes: MBtu = million British thermal units.
The IEA crude oil price is a weighted average import price among IEA member countries.
Natural gas prices are weighted averages expressed on a gross calorific- value basis.
The US natural gas price reflects the wholesale price prevailing on the domestic market.
The European Union and China gas prices reflect a balance of pipeline and LNG imports, while the Japan gas price is solely LNG imports; the LNG prices used are those at the customs border, prior to regasification.
Steam coal prices are weighted averages adjusted to 6 000 kilocalories per kilogramme.
The US steam coal price reflects minemouth prices plus transport and handling cost.
Coastal China steam coal price reflects a balance of imports and domestic sales, while t he European Union and Japanese steam coal price is solely for imports.
In the case of oil, keeping the market in balance in the STEPS requires a rebound in investment that is stimulated by a rise in prices to around $70/barrel over the next five years, af ter which prices flatten in a range between $75 -85/barrel.
Shale supply is quite elastic at these prices, and major conventional resource -holders are also assumed to be wary of encouraging a major influx of US shale to the market.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdo wn 81 2 In the case of natural gas, the current global supply surplus gradually erodes in the STEPS, and regional divergences between spot prices reappear, reflecting the costs of moving gas between the different markets.
Gas prices rise in most importing markets to plug a potential supply deficit that would otherwise emerge in the mid -2020s.
The US Henry Hub remains an important reference price for global gas markets, and stays in a $2 -4 per million British thermal units (MBtu) range through to 2040.
Asia is the key growth market for impo rts, which are increasingly priced off indices that reflect the region's supply -demand balance, rather than oil prices; nonetheless, Europe remains a crucial balancing market for internationally traded natural gas.
International coal prices have also been revised downwards in the STEPS, reflecting lower overall demand, together with ambitions in China and India to satisfy a larger share of demand from domestic supply.
Prices in the DRS are lower for each fuel than in the STEPS because demand is lower and it takes longer to work off the existing overhang in supply capacity.
In the SDS, fuel prices stabilise at still lower levels because of considerably lower demand for fossil fuels, removing the need to develop higher cost resources.
The prices actually paid by consumers in the various scenarios are strongly affected by policies, notably by efforts to remove fossil fuel consumption subsidies and to account for environmental externalities by putting a price on carbon.
All existing or announced carbon pricing schemes, at national and sub- national level, are reflected in the STEPS.
Higher carbon prices are applied on a much more widespread basis in the SDS ( Table 2.3).
Table 2.3 ⊳ CO 2 prices in selected regions by scenario ($2019 per tonne) Region Sector 2025 2040 Stated Policies Canada Power, industry, aviation, others* 34 38 Chile Power 8 20 China Power, industry, aviation 17 35 European Union Power, industry, aviation 34 52 Korea Power, industry 34 52 South Africa Power, industry 10 24 Sustainable Development Advanced economies Power, industry, aviation** 63 140 Selected developing economies Power, industry, aviation** 43 125 * In Canada's benchmark/backstop policies, a carbon price is applied to fuel consumed in additional sectors.
** Coverage of aviation is limited to the same regions as in the STEPS .
Note: Carbon prices in the DRS are close to those of the STEPS.
Technology innovation, deployment and costs The IEA World Energy Model meets demand for energy services by deploying a wide range of energy technologies, including those that are widely available and those that are judged to be approaching commercialisation.
Although we do not assume any technology IEA.
82 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Overview and Introduction breakthroughs (on the grounds that these are inherently difficult to antici pate), a continuous process of technology improvement and learning is built into the modelling.
This applies to appliances and motors purchased by end -users; infrastructure for transporting energy products, including smart grids; and technologies for energ y extraction and transformation.
Key renewable electricity production and storage technologies – including solar PV, wind and batteries – are expected to continue getting cheaper quickly through a combination of research, economies of scale and ongoing improvements to manufacturing and installation (i.e.
The result is a self -reinforcing cycle as more competitive and efficient technologies facilitate policy changes that support more demand for them, and hence stronger incentives for furth er innovation .
However, while improvements are expected for all energy technologies, the pace of change varies by scenario depending on the policy frameworks that are put in place ( Figure 2.11 ).
How quickly much -needed technologies for emissions -free shipping, aviation and heavy industry are scaled -up, for example, is a key variable in shaping and distinguishing the various scenarios.
Figure 2.11 ⊳ Capital costs for selected energy technologies in 2040 relative to 2019 Innovation reduces the capital costs of technologies for clean energy supply and end- use, with more deployment driving faster reductions in the SDS Note: EVs = electric vehicles.
Oil and gas costs are structurally lower than in previous WEOs, although in many cases resources gradually become more expensive to extract over time (as continued upstream innovation and technology improvements are offset by the effects of depletion on costs).
As a result, these fuels face increasingly stern competition in a growing number of applications from low -carbon energy supplies.
-60%-40%-20% Heat pumps EVs Solar PV Grid-scale batteries Offshore wind Hydrogen electrolysers STEPS SDS IEA.
Chapter 2 | An energy world in lockdown 83 2 The speed at which technology performance improves and costs fall in all WEO scenarios is largely determined by the rate of deployment.
As markets for technologies expand, the incentives to innovate and capture market share rise.
At the same time, economies of scale deliver lower costs and the higher number of engineers and installers working in the growing industry are quicker to identify enhancements and adaptations for new users.
To reflect this in the model, learning rates are used to capture the expected magnitude of the cost reduction and efficiency improvement each time cumulative deployment doubles.
These rates vary by technology and are based on historical experience.
In the SDS, the speed at which energy- producing and energy -consuming equipment are replaced and new technologies introduced is as fast as has ever been seen in the history of energy.
For those technologies at an early stage of development today, diffusion time would need to be reduced by several decades compared with historical averages.
IEA analysis in the Energy Technology Perspectives series has shown that 35% of the additional emissions reductions needed to reach net -zero greenhouse gas emissions in the SDS (compared with the STEPS) would come from technologies that have not yet cleared the demons tration stage (IEA, 2020a ).
In all scenarios, some of the biggest changes in the energy system relate to the diffusion of technologies that have small unit size and are for energy end -uses.
These include batteries, electric heat pumps, electric vehicles, e lectrolysers and fuel cells that are modular even in large installations.
The widespread presence of such mass produced, small unit size energy products and technologies in the energy supply landscape is a relatively new development, and is set to expand.
These technologies generally have higher learning rates than largescale facilities which involve less standardisation.
For example, solar PV has an observed learning rate of around 20%, which is unusually high, and it is expected to maintain this rate in the future.
Solar PV capital costs fall in both the STEPS and the SDS, but decline more rapidly in the SDS to below $600 per kilowatt (kW) on average by 2030 (from $1 000/kW in 2019) because of higher cumulative deployment; this is more than 10% lower than in the STEPS.
In addition, other improvements, such as higher efficiency panel technologies and auxiliary equipment that helps panels better track and capture sunlight, also improve solar PV performance.
For technologies at an earlier stage of development , and technologies still in the laboratory, the Covid -19 pandemic represents a possible setback.
Projects and policies with longer -term objectives are likely to come under budgetary pressure in the public and private sectors, and the risks for investors in start- ups and key demonstration projects are likely to rise (IEA, 2020a) .
This is one of the key risks to innovation progress in the DRS .
Governments have a central role to play in preventing structural and long -lasting damage to the pipeline of new ideas and the capacity to commercialise them.
PART B SCENARIOS Part B of this WEO includes the long -term scenario projections, with a particular focus on pathways out of the crisis over the next ten years to 2030.
Chapter 3 presents the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS), assessing the status of efforts to meet goals related to climate change, universal energy access and air quality, how these have been affected by the pandemic, and how policy makers could ensur e a sustainable recovery.
Chapter 4 extends this analysis.
In the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Case (NZE2050), it examines what would need to happen over the next ten years to put the world on track for net -zero emissions by 2050, earlier than in the SDS.
Chapters 5 to 7 focus mainly on the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS), examining energy demand (Chapter 5), electricity (Chapter 6) and fuel supply (Chapter 7) in turn.
The analysis covers all fuels, technologies and regions .
It investigates how the outlooks are being re -shaped by the dramatic shocks of 2020, as well as by today's policy settings and technology developments .
Chapter 8 introduces the Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS), which takes a more pessimistic view than the ST EPS on the duration and severity of the pandemic and its economic impacts.
It illustrates the risks not only for the energy sector , but also to the broader prospects for sustainable development .
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 87 Chapter 3 Buildi ng on a sustainable recovery Can every cloud have a silver lining ?
• Lockdown measures and the economic fallout from Covid -19 mean that CO 2 emissions are expected to decline by 7% in 2020 and i nvestment in clean energy is expected to fall by 6% .
In the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) , CO 2 emissions rebound in 2021, exceed 2019 levels in 2027, and rise to 36 Gt in 2030.
This is far from the immediate peak and decline in emission s needed to meet climate goals , including the Paris Agreement.
• The pandemic has also had an impact on progress towards the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Past progress on energy access in Africa is being reversed: the number of people without access to electricity is set to increase in 2020 after declining over the past six years, while basic electricity services have become unaffordable for up to 30 million people who had gained electricity access.
In the STEPS, the economic fallout from Covid -19 adds to the difficulties faced by governments and other actors in expanding access, leaving 660 m illion people without access to electricity in 2030, most of them in sub -Saharan Africa, and close to 2.4 billion people without access to clean cooking globally.
• Our bottom -up country -by-country analysis of energy infrastructure both in operation today and under construction shows that, if these assets were operate d in line with past practice until the end of their lifetimes, they w ould generate a level of CO 2 emissions that would lead to a long -term temperature increase of 1.65 °C (with a 50% probability).
In the STEPS, these emissions and those from new infrastructure lead to a long -term temperature rise of around 2.7 °C in 2100.
• But this future is not set in stone.
Governments may decide to change the policies they have already put in place or announced, and thus change the outlook.
The Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) shows a possible future course: it works backwards from the achievement of en ergy -related UN SDGs and shows what would be required to meet them.
The Sustainable Recovery Plan , introduced in the recent Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report , is fully integrated into this Outlook's SDS.
So is the achievement of the targets to achieve net- zero emissions announced by a number of jurisdictions .
Existing carbon -intensive assets are operated in the SDS differently from in the past and there is a systematic preference for the development of new low -emissions infrastructur e. • As part of post -Covid economic stimulus packages, the SDS sees $40 billion average annual investment towards energy access through to 2030 , three -times more than in the STEPS, with universal access achieved by 2030.
This is predicated on strong policy s upport and international co -operation, particularly in sub- Saharan Africa.
88 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery • Concentrations of the major air pollutants drop dramatically in the SDS: energyrelated emissions of NO X, SO 2 and PM 2.5 fall by 40-60% by 2030, leading to 2.5 million fewer premature deaths from air pollution in 2030 than in the STEPS.
This results in significantly cleaner air in major cities than was the case during lockdowns in 2020.
• CO 2 emissions in the SDS fall to less than 27 Gt in 2030, around 9 Gt lower than in the STE PS.
By 2030, low -carbon sources of electricity account for almost two -thirds of total generation worldwide; the emissions intensity of industrial activity is 40% lower; and electric cars make up about 40% of new car sales.
Rapid progress is also made in in novation and the deployment of low -carbon fuels and energy technologies, including hydrogen, carbon capture utilisation and storage, direct air capture and small modular nuclear reactors.
• The SDS also leads to significant reductions in methane emissions, e specially from oil and gas operations.
There are many abatement options available at very low cost.
Methane emissions are reduced in the SDS by 75% from 2019 levels by 2030.
• Investment in clean energy and electricity networks rises in the SDS from $0.9 trillion in 2019 to $2.7 trillion in 2030.
Nearly 70% of clean energy and grid investment to 2030 comes from private sources , with public finance and policy design playing a vital role in mobilising it.
Recent efforts to incorporate sustainability into decision making in financial markets may in time increase the availability of private finance, but they have not yet translated into an acceleration of clean energy capital expenditure.
Figure 3.1 ⊳ CO 2 emissions from existing energy infrastructure and power plants under construction operated in line with past practice CO 2 emissions just from existing energy infrastructure and power plants under construction would lead to a long- term temperature rise of 1.65 °C Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
15 20 25 30 35 40 2010 2020e 2030Gt CO2 Existing energy infrastructure and power plants under construction Pathway for net -zero CO₂ emissions in 2050SDSHistorical IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 89 3 3.1 Introduction Modern energy services are essential to society and economic activity, and the provision of universal and affordable energy is a key weapon in the fight against poverty.
But the production and use of energy is also the largest source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions today and a major contributor to air pol lution.
In the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) , the current and announced policies of governments fail to deliver full access to energy for all or to provide a substantial improvement in air quality.
Carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions rebound and exceed 2019 levels by 2027, a trajectory that is not compatible with the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) related to energy or with climate goals , including the Paris Agreement.
In the Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS) , emissions remain at a lower level for a lon ger period as a result of a slower recovery in global economic activity, such that in 2030 they are 2.3 gigatonnes (Gt) lower than in the STEPS.
These reductions reflect lower economic growth rather than structural changes in the production or in the use of energy, and in the longer term the DRS also falls short of meeting climate goals, in addition to slow progress in achieving the SDGs.
Of course, there are a variety of possible future pathways.
A possible trajectory is analysed in our Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) , which sets out an energy future that simultaneously achieves the three SDGs most closely related to energy: universal access to affordable and modern energy (SDG 7); reducing impacts of air pollution (part of SDG 3 and SDG 11 ); and tackling climate change (SDG 13 ).
This chapter examines the policies and changes that would be necessary to achieve these goals and the implications of doing so, with a focus on what would need to happen over the next ten years.
3.1.1 How has Covid- 19 affect ed the Sustainable Development Scenario?
A new starting point The direct impacts of the crisis on energy demand and CO 2 emissions have provided a revised starting point for the SDS in this Outlook : energy demand in 2020 is set to fall by around 5 % from 2019 levels; CO 2 emissions are expected to fall by around 7%; and total investment in the energy sector is set to drop by 18 %.
Activity levels in certain end-use sectors have been hit even harder: demand for passenger aviation in 2020 has fallen by about 40 %, and oil use for cars is down by 8 %.
A jump in poverty levels in developing regions has made basic electricity services unaffordable for more than 110 million people connected to electricity , and is pushing many households back to using traditional and inefficient fuels for lighting and cooking.
An evolving backdrop While the impacts of Covid -19 are still evolving, it is very likely that s ome of the fallout will make it harder to achieve the SDG goals embodied in the Sustainable Development Figures an d tables from this chapter are accessible through your IEA account : .
90 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Scenario .
Much depends on how long these impacts persist.
For example:  The drop in oil and gas prices could act as a barrier to the uptake of clean energy technologies for some end-uses .
The payback period for many energy efficiency retrofits in buildings, for example, is longer if fossil fuel prices are lower.
 In several sectors, the drop in economic activity and increased economic uncertainty is likely to result in slower turnover of capital stock, meaning that more carbon -intensive and/or inefficient capital stock may operat e for longer.
 The perceived risk of lending money to a number of developing countries has increased dramatically.
This makes it more e xpensive for those countries to raise debt fina nce for energy technologies and improving energy access.
However, some aspects of energy sector transformation s may be made easier:  In a number of advanced economies , a decline in interest rates and accommodat ive monetary policy by central banks means that base lending rates will stay lower for longer.
Given the capital -intensive nature of many clean energy technologies, this could translate into lower deployment costs.
 Financial pressures on existing coal asse ts, and increasing ly on natural gas assets, could accelerate retirements and make financing new projects harder in certain jurisdictions.
 Recovery plans designed to kick -start economic growth , protect workers and create jobs could provide a substa ntial boo st to the deployment of clean energy technologies, for example, by developing strategies that make use of existing skills in the energy sector to support clean energy transitions ( Box 3.1 ).
 Lower fossil fuel prices could make it easier for governments to reform fossil fuel subsidies.
Box 3.1 ⊳ Sustainable Recovery Plan The economic damage brought about by the pandemic has created an opportunity to support economic growth and jobs while boost ing investmen t in clean energy technologies .
It is in this context that the Sustainable Recovery Plan was formulated and included in the recent Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report (IEA, 2020a).
Full implementation of the Sustainable Recovery Plan would increase annual investment in clean energy infrastructure by $1 trillion above histori c levels in the three years from 2021 to 20 23, kick -starting an accelerated programme of spending on clean energy technologies in the SDS that extends beyond the Plan's initial three -year period.
The Sustainable Recovery Plan takes account of the circumstances of individual countries as well as existing energy project pipelines and current market conditions .
This Plan is fully embedded within this year's SDS.
Around 40% of the spending in the Sustainable Recovery Plan is for efficiency measures across the transport, buildings and industry sectors .
A further one -third is to support IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 91 3 the growth of low -carbon electricity generation , to expan d and modernis e electricity grids and to bring electricity to people who currently lack access.
The remainder is spent to: electrify end -uses (especially passenger cars and heat in buildings); mak e the production and use of fuels more sustainable; improve urban infrastructure (including by putting in place or expanding charging networks for electric vehicles, public transport , and wal king and cycling infrastructure); improv e access to clean cooking in low-income countries; and boost innovation in critical technology areas such as hydrogen, batteries, carbon capture, utilisation and storage ( CCUS ) and small modular nuclear reac tors.
If implemented in full, the Sustainable Recovery Plan would: lead to global gross domestic product (GDP) being 3.5% higher in 2023 than it would otherwise be; save or create around 9 million jobs a year over the next three years; deliver rapid action on emissions reductions (annual energy -related GHG emissions would be 4.5 Gt lower than would otherwise be the case and a ir pollutant emiss ions would be around 5% lower); provide electricity access to around 270 million people; and provide access to clean cooking to around 420 million people.
3.2 Energy access Access to modern and reliable energy services is a prerequisite to unlock economic development and bring improvements in health, food security, agricultural practices and gender equality .1 There has been some recent progress on improving energy access.
For instance, the Government of India reports that more than 99% of the population is now connected to electricity, and effective policies are being implemented in a number of countries in Afr ica (IEA, 2019a) .
However, our latest country -by-country assessment finds that 770 million people still did not have access to electricity in 2019 and around 2.6 billion people remained without access to clean cooking.
In some South Asian and sub -Saharan African countries, half of health facilities either do not have access to electricity, or face unscheduled outages preventing them from delivering essential services (IEA, IRENA, UNSD, World Bank, WHO, 2020) .
The Covid -19 crisi s has brought into stark relief the large inequalities that exist around the world in terms of access to reliable energy and healthcare services, especially in rural and peri -urban areas, and has highlighted the need to expand energy access to help populat ions mitigate the effects of the crisis (IEA, 2020 a).
1 A full description of the World Energy Outlook energy access definition and methodology can be found at -energy -access -2019 -methodology.
This section focuses on challenges related to access to reliable and sustainable energy in emerging market and d eveloping economies.
It does not discuss similar challenges that may still exist in advanced economies.
For example, the Government of Canada has recently made a strong commitment to support the transition of Indigenous communities from reliance on diesel to clean, renewable energy.
92 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery 3.2.1 Impacts of the pandemic The Covid -19 crisis has had a number of negative consequences for initiatives to improve energy access.
Shifting government priorities, s upply -chain disruptions and social distan cing measures have slowed access programmes and hindered activities in the decentralised energy access area .
First estimates show that sales of distributed solar products in emerging market and developing economies fell substantially in the first -half of 2020 compared with the same period in 2019.
In sub -Saharan Africa, total sales dropped by around 10% : sales were relatively stable in Kenya and Rwanda , but they fell by 20 -30% in Ethiopia, Nigeria and Uganda (GOGLA, 2020).
In addition, more than 80% of privately owned decentralised energy companies have indicated that, without financial support, they will struggle to survive beyond the end of the year: jobs are already being lost, with a third of these companies reporting th at they have laid -off at least 30% of their staff (EnD ev, 2020).
2 Sub-Saharan Africa, home to three -quarters of the global population without access to electricity and more than one -third of people without access to clean cooking, has been particularly hard hit.
Recent progress on access in the region is being reversed by the pandemic and its effects.
Our first estimate s indicate that the population without access to electricity could increase in 2020 for the first time since 2013, and that the number of people without access to clean cooking is continuing to expand.
In addition to these immediate impacts, there are two mutually reinforcing risks now emerging that threaten to increase further energy inequality.
First, there is a risk that the economic slowdown caused by Covid -19 increases poverty and makes energy less affordable for many, causing reversals in recent progress on energy access.
Second, there is the risk that those countries with the greatest need to improve access to energy and clean cooking wi ll find that the availability of finance diminishes, hampering their capacity to improve matters.
Affordability and energy poverty The economic fallout from the Covid -19 crisis has affected the incomes of many vulnerable people in emerging market and dev eloping economies.
Up to 100 million people, mainly in sub-Saharan Africa and developing Asia, are likely to slip into extreme poverty in 2020, and a further 200 million people are at risk of falling into poverty (Lakner et al., 2020 ).3 In addition to making it harder for those still lacking access to gain it, this decline in household incomes means that some vulnerable households that currently have access to electricity may be unable to pay their bills.
More than 25 million people in developing Asia and Africa could lose the ability to afford an essential bundle of electricity services by the 2 The decentralised energy sector refers to companies deploying electricity mini- grids, household solar products and appliances, or clean cooking stoves and fuels in emerging market and developing economies .
3 The World Bank defines extreme poverty as living with less than $1.90/day; higher poverty lines at less than $3.20/day or $5.50/day are also used.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustain able recovery 93 3 end of 2020 ( Figure 3.2).4 Two -thirds of these are in sub -Saharan Africa, accounting for around 3% of the population currently connected in the region.
Countries such as Ethiopia, Nigeria, Democratic Republic of the Congo or Niger could see between 5% and 10% of their connected population threatened.
A further 85 million connected people, mainly in developing Asia, could lose the ability to pay for an extended bundle of electricity se rvices.
The difference in emphasis between losing access to the essential bundle of electricity services in sub -Saharan Africa and losing access to the extended bundle in Asia reflects different circumstances: sub -Saharan Africa has relatively more people at risk of being pushed into extreme poverty (less than $1.90/day) due to Covid -19, while in Asia (and particularly India) the crisis is likely to result in more people crossing higher poverty lines ($3.20/day or $5.50/day).
Figure 3.2 ⊳ People with access to electricity in Asia and Africa at risk of losing the ability to pay for basic electricity services in 2020 More than 25 million people could become unable to afford an essential bundle of electricity services in 2020, with a further 85 million unable to afford an extended bundle Notes: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
The number of people at risk of being unable to afford the essential bundle is not a subset of the people at risk of being unable to afford the extended bundle.
Sources: IEA analysis ; Lakner et al.
This is forcing low -income households to make trade -offs between their energy needs and other demands , and may push them back to traditional and inefficient fuels.
For example, in South Africa, up to 6% of the connected population could become unable to afford basic 4 The essential bundle of electricity services includes a mobile phone charger, four lightbulbs operating four hours per day, a fan three hours per day and a television two hours per day, equating to 500 kilowatthours (kWh) per household per year with standard appliances.
The extended bundle includes the essential bundle plus one refrigerator, and double hours for the fa n and the television, equating to 1 250 kWh per household per year with standard appliances.
We consider a household at risk of losing ability to pay when it represents over 5% of the household spending.
"Basic electricity services" are defined as services provided by either the essential or extended bundle.
20 40 60 80 100 2020e 2020eMillion peopleAsia AfricaEssential bundle of electricity servicesExtended bundle of electricity services IEA.
94 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery electricity services, and could be forced to revert to using biomass or kerosene for cooking and lighting.
A similar pattern is being observed for clean cooking access, and many households in rural or peri -urban areas could backslide to charcoal, kerosene or fuelwood (Box 3.2 ).
Some countries have introduced measures to protect vulnerable customers and support continued access to energy services.
For example, Cô te d'Ivoire, Ghana, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal and Togo have been providing free electricity to poor households for several months; Uganda removed value -added tax on liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) in June 2020; and the government in India guaranteed free LPG refills for some of the poorest members of society between April and September 2020.
Box 3.2 ⊳ Can new ways to pay for LPG help keep cooking clean?
For a clean cooking fuel to be a sustainable and long -term solution, it needs to be affordable, to have well -developed and ideally diversified supply routes, and to involve the use of safe, high quality cooking equipment.
Obtaining access to clean cooking fuels is not the end of the story: in poor households, the use of clean cooking fuels is vulnerable to changes in income and fuel price s. In Brazil, for example, there is widespread ac cess to LPG, but around 3 million households switched to using firewood and charcoal as cooking fuel between 2016 and 2018 because of increases in the price of LPG alongside rising unemployment (Agência Brasil, 2019) .
The Covid -19 crisis could reverse progress on clean cooking.
A survey conducted by the University of Liverpool before and during a community -wide lockdown in an informal settlement of Nairobi found that confinement measures caused a major reduction in income for ar ound 95% of households surveyed (Shupler et al., 2020) .
As a result, nearly 15% of households that had been using LPG as a primary cooking fuel prior to the Covid -19 crisis reverted to purchasing kerosene, and a further 13% switched to gathering free firewood to meet their cooking needs.
In the settlement, kerosene has a per-meal fuel cost almost 60% higher than bulk LPG, but a full cylinder of LPG has a high upfront cost.
If there were to be a similar trend across all of sub -Saharan Africa , nearly 25 million people would be at risk of reverting to traditional fuels.
There are a number of consumer finance mechanisms that could help to overcome this hurdle.
One option is pay -as-you-go (PAYG).
This allows customers to buy smaller amounts of fuel, often wi th credit s paid for with mobile money, so that they can adapt payments to changes in their income.
T he University of Liverpool study in Nairobi found that 95% of customers of a local PAYG LPG commercial operator continued to use LPG throughout the lockdown period, and some increased their frequency of use.
Of respondents that used kerosene prior to the lockdown, around half indicated that the ability to purchase LPG in small amounts is the most attractive feature of PAYG LPG.
This option can also reduce accidents by limiting the risks of cylinder piracy or crossfilling.
Other policies that could also help countries to avoid a reversal of progress on IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 95 3 access to clean cooking include: maintaining or introducing fiscal measures such as targeted fuel subsidies or tax exemptions to support vulnerable households ; maintaining competitive markets (helping to ensure, for example, that recent falls in global oil prices are passed on to customers ); and supporting the improvement of supply chain s to reduce end-user price s. Availability of financing The finance available for funding expansion and upgrades of electricity and clean cooking access in the past has been much less than what is needed to achieve full access in line with UN SDG 7.
Between 2013 and 2017, around $8 billion was spent on average each year to improve electricity access in 20 countries representing around 70% of the world's population without access to electricity; in the same period, around $70 million was spent each year on clean cooking in the 20 countries with the highest number of people lacking access (Sustainable Energy for All, 2019).
In the SDS, the average annual investment required from 2021 to 2030 to reach full energy access in emerging market and developing economies is around $35 billion fo r electricity access, and $6 billion for clean cooking access: more than half of this investment takes place in sub -Saharan Africa.
The majority of financing for energy access in recent years has come in the form of debt from international public institutions, with most of the remainder funded privately (Sustainable Energy for All, 2019) .
However Covid -19 is likely to reduce the level of finance that is available for access, as evidenced by the withdrawal of $100 billion of capital from emerging economies during the first -quarter 2020, an amount greater than the total outflows during the 2008 crisis (IMF , 2020).
As a result, the perceived risk of lending money to most developing countries has increased dramatically , including in a number of countries with the greatest need for progress on access ( Figure 3.3).
The cost of borrowing increased across sub -Saharan Africa by around two percentage points on average between 2019 and the first -half of 2020.
This could directly affect the prospects for future progress on access to both electricity and clean cooking.
For example, i f risk mitigation mechanisms are not implemented at the sc ale needed, we estimate that the increase in perceived risks alone could result in 2 million fewer people gaining access to electricity in 2021 in sub -Saharan Africa ; this is around 10% of the number of people who gained access annually in the region in re cent years.
Other risks such as the deteriorating exchange rates in emerging market and developing economies could further worsen access to finance by discouraging international investors.
Many of these challenges will worsen the already difficult situation faced by energy companies, including both state -owned utilities and privately owned decentralised energy companies that deploy renewable electricity systems or clean cooking options in emerging market and developing economies.
An increase in sovereign r isks is likely to lead to further difficulties for companies in raising finance, and there may also be a reduction in revenue from customers who are no longer able to pay for services.
96 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Figure 3.3 ⊳ Population without electricity access and sovereign risk in key access deficit countries The cost of borrowing has increased dramatically in seven countries that accounted for around 50% of all people without electricity access globally in 2019 Note: H1 2020e = estimated values for first -half of 2020.
Source: IEA analysis based on Damodaran (2020) .
3.2.2 A pathway to universal energy access by 2030 The economic difficulties and risks arising from the Covid -19 crisis are moving many regions further away from the goal of universal access.
In the STEPS, there is a slowdown in progress in 2020 and 2021, which means that by 2030 there are around 660 milli on people who do not have access to electricity and 2.4 billion people who do not have access to clean cooking.
This is respectively around 35 million and 60 million more people than in the STEPS in the World Energy Outlook -2019 (WEO -2019) (IEA, 2019b).
If the economic rebound were to be slower, as in the Delayed Recovery Scenario, then an additional 100 million and 240 million people would not have access to electricity and clean cooking in 2030 ( Figure 3.4).
Sub -Saharan Africa in particular would see the access situation worsen, with the number of people without access to electricity increasing to 630 million (more than 80% of the global total), and with 1.1 billion remaining without access to clean cooking.
This slowdown in progress would also be likely to lead to job losses in the energy access sector, a sector that not only holds the potential to employ more people than the traditional energy sector but also creates indirect jobs within the communities gaining access (Power for All, 2019).
In the SDS, governments and donors put access at the heart of recovery plans and programmes in order to achieve universal access by 2030.
This involves, for example, measures to support the emerging private solar sector, and the setting of action -based targets to boost progress at the pace needed.
In a world where finance is constrained, access projects will need to be smart (e.g.
linked with agriculture to unlock relat ed 250 500 7501 000 20 40 60 80 Congo DRC Nigeria Ethiopia Pakistan Tanzania Uganda Bangladesh Basis pointsMillion people Population without electricity access in 2019 Sovereign risk (right axis): 2019 H1 2020e IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 97 3 benefits), effective and capable of being implemented quickly.
It is difficult to see how universal access could be achieved by 2030 without decentralised energy solutions also playing an important part, in particular in reaching those households that are far from a grid.
Some countries are moving ahead.
Integrated national electricity access plans using both centrali sed and decentrali sed solutions adapted to the local context are already showing benefits in Ghana, Senegal, Ethiopia, Nigeria and Rwanda (IEA, 2019a).
Many of these plans aim to maximise the benefits of energy access by considering the needs of health services , schools, agricultural enterprises and similar organisations alongside those of households.
In its sti mulus plan, Nigeria emphasised the role of both decentrali sed solar photovoltaic ( PV) systems and LPG in provid ing modern fuel , while stimulus measures in Indonesia include a commitment to provide 1 gigawatt (GW) of solar panels each year for poor households.
Figure 3.4 ⊳ Population without access to energy in the Stated Policies and Delayed Recovery scenarios by region, 2019-2030 In 2030, 660 million people remain without electricity and 2.4 billion without clean cooking in the STEPS; the numbers are worse in the DRS Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Sources: IEA analysis; WHO (2020).
Clean c ooking access requires clear am bitions and effective program mes that support affordable solutions for the poorest households and the deployment of effective infrastructure (IEA, 2020 a).
LPG and improved cookstoves offer readily available and scalable solution s in many regions today, but alternative fuels for cooking, such as biogas or bioethanol could also have a part to play in many regions, depending on local circumstances.
Other technologies currently being explored could also help deliver clean cooking.
Electric pressure cookers, for example, powered by solar PV and a battery, could represent a clean, standalone and cost -effective way to improve access to clean cooking without overburdening distribution or micro grids; alternatively, renewable LPG could provide a locally produced sustainable source of fuel in certain areas.
5001 0001 5002 0002 5003 000 2019 2020e 2025 2030 2019 2020e 2025 2030Million peopleAdditional in DRS Rest of the world Asia Sub-Saharan AfricaClean cooking Electricity IEA.
98 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery 3.3 Air pollution Polluted air is a leading risk factor for death and a major health and environmental issue worldwide.
O utdoor air pollution was responsible for over 3 million premature deaths globally in 2019 , mostly in countries in Asia .
In addition, household air pollution – mostly from the traditional use of biomass for cooking – caused around 2.4 million premature deaths in 2019.
The economic costs of air pollution are estimated to have amounted to $2.9 trillion i n 2018 ( 3.3% of global GDP ).
These costs place a considerable burden on healthcare systems and constrain economic growth (CREA, 2018).
3.3.1 Impacts of the pandemic Many of the lockdown measures implemented to contain the pandemic resulted in measurably cleaner air.
Average levels of nitrogen dioxide (NO 2) in Europe were down by 40% in April 2020 compared with April 2019, and particulate matter air pollution dropped by 10% on average over the same period.
It is estimated that this avoided some 11 000 premature deaths from air pollution that would otherwise have occurred (Myllyvirta and Thieriot, 2020) .
Large reductions in air pollution were also in evidence across Asia, with the effects most pronounced in colder, wealthier and more industrialised cities (Singh et al., 2020).
The lockdown experience also gave many people a new awareness of the high levels of ambient air pollution they had been living with on a daily basis.
Polling data suggests that air pollution has become a major priority for city dwell ers, with upswings in support for schemes that would maintain or extend recent improvements in air quality (Transport Environment, 2020) .
In Jakarta, for example, pop -up bike lanes have been built to handle a ten-fold increase in commuter cyclists , and in London a congestion charge on traffic has been extended (ITDP, 2020; ECF, 2020) .
There has also been "re -spacing" (for example by widening pavements) in Milan, Bogota, New York City and other cities to enable social distancing and to combat the return of air pollution (ITF, 2020).
Yet there are signs that outdoor air pollution could rebound quickly in the aftermath of the pandemic, and even exceed pre -Covid levels as people shun public transport in favour of private cars.
As loc kdowns eased through May and June 2020, but before full economic reopening, several European cities recorded levels of NO 2 approaching average valu es for the same period in 2019 (CREA, 2020a) .
In China , average levels of sul phur dioxide (SO 2) and fine par ticulate matter (PM 2.5) exceeded pre -crisis levels during April and May 2020, probably as a result of a rise in the use of coal , while NO 2 concentrations were similar to the same period in 2019 (CREA, 2020b).
The Covid -19 crisis has also brought a renewed focus on the connections between air quality and public health.
While there is currently no clear empirical evidence that exposure to air pollution increases the severity or likelihood of Covid -19 infection s, a number of studies are starting to emerge whic h have reported links between Covid -19 and levels of air pollution (Conticini, Frediani, and Caro, 2020; Setti et al., 2020) .
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 99 3 3.3.2 A pathway to cleaner air by 2030 In the STEPS , levels of PM 2.5, nitrogen oxides ( NO X) and SO 2 fall by 10 -20% between 2019 and 2030.
However, p opulation growth and urbanisation mean that, despite this modest decline, an extra 850 million people live in citie s and are exposed to polluted urban air.
As a result, there are around 500 000 more premature deaths each year due to air pol lution worldwide in 2030 than in 20 19.
These are mainly concentrated in Asia (China, India and South east Asia) and s ub-Saharan Africa.
Around 60% of premature deaths in 2030 in the STEPS are from breathing polluted outdoor air, with the remainder from hous ehold air pollution, mainly stemming from a lack of access to clean cooking.
Figure 3.5 ⊳ Premature deaths from air pollution by region and air pollution emissions by pollutant and scenario, 2019 and 2030 Emissions of the three main air pollutants drop by 40 -60% in the SDS by 2030, cutting premature deaths from air pollution by over one -third compared to 2019 Note: Americas includes South America, Central America , North America and the Caribbean.
Sources: IEA analysis; International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis.
The SDS does not entirely eliminate air pollution but it sets out a pragmatic course towards significant reductions in e ach of the main pollutants across all regions by 2030 (Figure 3.5).
About 2.5 million premature deaths would be avoided compared with the STEPS in 2030, and over 12 million premature deaths would be avoided cumulatively over the period to 2030.
Although not all air pollution originates from the energy sector, much of it does, and the SDS illustrates the extent to which various energy -related sectors are r esponsible for different types of air pollution.
For example , half of the total SO 2 reductions in 2030 come from a rapid decline in coal use for electricity generation and in industry.
For NO X, the majority of overall reductions come from the t ransport sec tor, while 60% of total PM 2.5 reductions come from reducing the use of polluting fuels in cooking and domestic heating.
1 2 3 4 5 6 2019 2030 STEPS 2030 SDSMillion people Americas Europe China India Africa and Middle East Rest of worldPremature deaths -50% 50%100% 2019 2025 2030NOₓ SO₂ PM NOₓ SO₂ PMChange in air pollutants STEPS SDSIndex (2019 = 100%)2.5 2.5 IEA.
100 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Box 3.3 ⊳ How does the reduction in PM 2.5 concentrations during lockdowns compare with the SDS?
Lockdowns had an immediate and widely reported impact on air quality in major cities, mainly due to reduced levels of road traffic.
However, they did not cause equal reductions in al l types of air pollution.
While NO 2 fell consistently, PM 2.5 showed a mixed response, and in some cities did not drop at all, mainly because only a small fraction of PM 2.5 comes from road traffic (Figure 3.6).
The ener gy sector is responsible for about 50 -80% of average PM 2.5 concentrations in most cities, with most of the remainder from agriculture and waste treatment.
Differences between cities reflect local circumstances, such as the proximity of the urban area to heavy industrial plants or power stations, the way buildings are heated, average levels of road congestion, as well as the local geography.
Weather conditions can also cause large differences in day -to-day recorded levels of pollution.
Figure 3.6 ⊳ PM 2.5 levels in selected cities in 2015 and in the SDS in 2030, and change in PM 2.5 during lockdowns The SDS would deliver much larger reductions in PM 2.5 concentrations in many cities by 2030 than was experienced during Covid- 19 lockdowns Notes: µg/m3 = micrograms per cubic metre.
Change in concentrations during lockdowns in 2020 compared to average concentrations for the same time of year 201 5-2019.
Sources: IEA analysis; International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis ; World Air Quality Index (2020) .
The SDS sees large cuts in PM 2.5 emissions across the energy sector.
New analysis done in co -operation with the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis shows that the contribution of emissions from power plants or heating in buildings to concentrations of PM 2.5 in cities wou ld all but vanish, and that this would be accompanied by major reductions in emissions from road transport and energyintensive industries.
In total, many cities would see 45 -65% reductions in PM 2.5 concentrations by 2030, resulting in significantly cleaner air than was experienced during lockdowns.
Crucially, this would be achieved without any disruption to economic activity or people's lives.
25 50 75 100 2015 2030 2015 2030 2015 2030 2015 2030 2015 2030Non-energy Road Non-road Delhi Beijing Milan Bangkok Chicagoµg/m3-28% -32% -13% -9% +3% Change during lockdown -62%-60% -46%-64% -59% Energy IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 101 3 3.4 Greenhouse gas emissions 3.4.1 Impacts of the pandemic Energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions are expected to fall by 2.4 Gt in 2020 as a result of the slowdown in economic activity and lockdown measures.
Previous economic downturns were often followed by major rebounds in emissions.
The annual increase in CO 2 emissions in 2010 after the 2008- 09 financial crisis, for example, was the largest ever.
There is also very likely to be a future rebound in emissions after the fall in 2020 unless it is forestalled by robust actions on the part of governments, industries and consumers.
The SDS in this Outlook fully incorporates the Sustainable Recovery Plan, meaning that investment in a number of clean energy technologies over the period to 2025 is higher than it was in the SDS in the WEO -2019 .
Investment between 2021 and 2025 in electricity genera tion and networks, for example, is nearly 15% higher in this Outlook than in the SDS in the WEO -2019 (Figure 3.7) .
A number of countries and jurisdiction s have recently increased their long -term ambition for emissions reductions (see Chapter 4), and these economy -wide emissions reductions goals are also included in the SDS.
Figure 3.7 ⊳ Change in CO 2 emissions by sector, 2019-2030, and average annual investment 2021-2025 in the Sustainable Development scenarios in WEO-2019 and WEO-2020 The SDS in the WEO -2020 has more emissions reductions to 2030 and more investment in low-emissions electricity generation and networks to 2025 than in the WEO -2019 As a result of the effects of the pandemic and the surge in clean energy investment that follows on from implementation of t he Sustainable Recovery Plan, the SDS in this 2020 Outlook sees more rapid changes than in the SDS in the WEO -2019 .
Global energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions are nearly 1 Gt lower in 2030 than in the WEO -2019 , and cumulative emissions in the 2019 -50 period are around 25 Gt lower.
Peak CO 2 emissions are already behind us in this year's SDS , with the peak occurring in 2019, and net -0.30.60.9 Fossil fuels generation Electricity networks Trillion dollarsAverage annual investment, 2021 -25 Change in emissions, 2019 -30 Low emissions- 6- 4- 2 Power Transport Buildings IndustryGt CO₂ WEO-2019 WEO-2020 IEA.
102 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery zero CO 2 emissions globally are on course to be achieved by 2070.
If emissions were to remain at zero from 2070, the SDS would provide a 50% probability of limiting the temperature rise to less than 1.65 °C, in line with the Paris Agreement objective of "holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C".
If negative emissions technologies were to be deployed after 2070 in the SDS, the temperature rise in 2100 could be limited to 1.5 ° C with a 50% probability.
3.4.2 CO 2 emissions from existing energy infrastructure The SDS sets out a n ambitious path for the reduction of GHG emissions in line with climate goals , including the Paris Agreement.
One of the key challenges in this regard is the emissions that are already "locked in" by existing infrastructure, such as power plants, factories, cars and those that will be similarly locked in upon the complet ion of fossil fuel power plants currently under construction.
If all of the energy infrastructure and assets that exist today and those currently under construction were to be used in a similar way as in the past until the end of their lifetimes , we estimate that they would – by themselves – almost entirely exhaust the scope for further emissions consistent with the SDS ( Figure 3.8).
Energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions would be around 26.5 Gt in 2030 and 10 Gt in 2050, falling to zero by 2070 (see Energy Technology Perspectives 2020 for emissions levels from different sectors [IEA, 2020b] ).
This level of emissions would lead to a global a verage temperature rise of around 1.65 ° C (with a 50% probability).
Figure 3.8 ⊳ Historical and projected CO 2 emissions from energy infrastructure in use and power plants under construction operated in line with past practice CO 2 emissions from continued use of existing energy infrastructure and power plants under construction would lead to a global average temperature rise of around 1.65 °C by 2070 Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
10 20 30 40 2010 2020e 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070Gt CO2 Existing energy infrastructure and power plants under construction Pathway for net -zero CO₂ emissions in 2050SDSHistorical IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 103 3 In the SDS, a wide range of technologies and measures are deployed to reduce emissions from existing assets and infrastructure that would otherwise continue to operate as in the STEPS and avoid some of the locked in emissions.
This includes, for example, reducing the amount of output from existi ng coal -fired power plants by repurposing them to focus on providing flexibility, by equipping existing plants with CCUS or co -firing with biomass, or retiring early if these options are not viable.
Existing buildings can also be made more efficient by ins ulating or air sealing, replacing inefficient heating systems and appliances, and installing heat pumps and domestic renewable energy systems.
In 2030, measures to reduce emissions from existing assets avoid 4.2 Gt CO 2 in annual emissions ( Figure 3.9).
Figure 3.9 ⊳ CO 2 emissions reductions in the Sustainable Development Scenario relative to the Stated Policies Scenario The SDS reduces emissions from existing infrastructure and has a preference for new lowemissions infrastructure; material efficiency and changes in behaviour also cut emissions Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
There is also a systematic preference in the SDS for all new assets and infrastructure to be as sustainable and efficient as possible.
For example, around 330 GW of new coal -fired power plants are developed over the period to 2030 in the STEPS; only a fraction of these, those already currently under construction, are built in the SDS.
About 90 million new cars are sold each year on average to 2030; in the SDS these cars are increasingly highly efficient or electric ca rs.
In total, emissions in 2030 are 4.2 Gt lower as a result of limiting the construction of new emitting assets that are built in the STEPS.
There is also a role for changes in activity in the SDS.
This includes material efficiency, which has an important part to play in emissions reductions in the industry sector (IEA, 2019c ), and modal shifts in the transport sector, which result in more peop le using public transport.
Changes like these avoid just under 1 Gt emissions in 2030.
20 25 30 35 40 2015 2020e 2025 2030Gt CO₂Reduce emissions from existing energy infrastructure Preference for low-emissions infrastructure Material efficiency and behaviourSDSSTEPS IEA.
104 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery 3.4.3 Energy sector transformation to 2030 Global primary energy demand declines by around 7% in the SDS between 2019 and 2030, with demand in advanced economies falling by more than 15% over this period (Figure 3.10 ).
This energy demand decline occurs despite strong economic growth , and it reflects two developments in particular.
First is the widespread deployment of both demand- and supply -side efficiency measures, and second is increased electrification of end-use sectors .
The primary energy intensity of the global economy in the SDS falls by more than 3% on average each year in the 2019 -30 period, compared with a decline of around 2% on average each year between 2010 and 2019.
Figure 3.10 ⊳ Energy sector transformation in advanced economies (top) and emerging market and developing economies (bottom) Global coal and oil demand have already peaked in the SDS; the re is a major increase in electricity use, which is increasingly generated using renewable sources Notes: Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent; TWh = terawatt -hours.
The share of fossil fuels in the primary energy mix has remained above 80% since the 1950s, but in the SDS it falls to around 70% in 2030.
Over the 2019-30 period, d emand for 4 8 12 16 20 2019 2025 2030TWhElectricity generation 2 4 6 8 10 2019 2025 2030Thousand MtoePrimary energy demand 2019 2025 2030Final energy consumption 4 8 12 16 20 2019 2025 2030TWh 2019 2025 2030 2 4 6 8 10 2019 2025 2030Thousand Mtoe Coal Oil Natural gas Nuclear Renewables Bioenergy Electricity Heat Other IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 105 3 coal in the SDS declines by more than 75% in advanced economies and by around 40% worldwide .
More than 80% of the global decline in coal use stems from reductions in the power sector.
Sharp reductions in oil use in passenger cars in the SDS over the period to 2030 mean that global oil demand never returns to the peak of 2019.
Although demand for oil is more resilient in sectors such as petrochemicals, total oil demand in 2030 is 12% lower than in 2019.
Global natural gas demand recovers slightly and exceeds 2019 levels throughout the mid2020s in the SDS.
It peaks soon after as a result of more efficient buildings and industrial processes and the rise of low -carbon gases such as biomethane and hydrogen.
Demand return s to 2019 levels by 2030.
The traditional use of biomass in developing economies declines dramatically as a result of universal energy access being achieved by 2030 in the SDS.
There is at the same time some increase in the modern use of solid biomass for electricity generation and in the use of biofuels in the transport sector.
Global electricity demand increases by nearly 20% between 2019 and 20 30 in the SDS, which means an increase of nearly 4 500 terawatt- hours (TWh), more than the current electricity demand in the United States.
As a result, the share of electricity in final energy consumption rises from 19% in 2019 to 24% in 2030.
The share of renewables in global electricity generation grows from just o ver 25% in 2019 to more than 50% in 2030, while the share of coal falls from 37% in 2019 to 15% in 2030.
In advanced economies, generation by wind and solar PV more than triples from 2019 to account for one -third of total generation in 2030.
In emerging market and developing economies, generation by wind and solar PV increases by a factor of six, accounting for around one -quarter of total generation in 2030.
Oil and natural gas production Oil and gas extraction and processing , and the subsequent transport of oil and oil products to end -use consumers, were responsible for nearly 15% of global energy sector GHG emissions in 2019.
The emissions intensity of oil and gas from different sources, companies and countries can vary widel y.
The full lifecycle emissions intensity of the highest emitting sources of oil globally is around 630 kilogrammes CO 2 equivalent (kg CO 2-eq) per barrel.
This is about 40% higher than the full lifecycle emissions intensity of the lowest emitting sources (440 kg CO 2-eq per barrel).5 Above ground development and operational choices often determine the emissions intensity of production, and there are number of options available to reduce these emissions.
5 These figures include combu stion of the oil, which results in around 400 kg CO 2-eq per barrel (although there are some uses of oil that do not result in combustion emissions, such as when the oil is used as petrochemical feedstock).
106 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery One of the most cost -effective ways of reducing the emissions intensity of oil and gas production is to limit methane emissions from oil and gas operations.
These are around 2 500 million tonnes ( Mt) CO 2-eq globally today, around half of total emissions from oil and gas operations.
There are a number of new and emerging technologies, such as satellite detection, that can help locate and reduce methane leaks from oil and gas operations.
We estimate that i t is technically possible today to reduce oil and gas methane emissions by around 75% (IEA, 2020c) .
A GHG price of $ 15/tonne CO 2-eq applied to new and existing facilities would be enough to incentivise the cost -effective deployment of nearly all of these abatement options.
Other options to reduce CO 2 emissions from oil and gas operations include the use of CCU S in refinin g; the use of renewable sources of power and heat in upstream operations; the implementation of measure to reduce flaring; and the acceleration of efforts to improve efficiency.
In the SDS, there are widespread and successful efforts to reduce the emissions intensity of oil and gas production, and sources with lower emissions intensities are increasingly preferred for development.
As a result, the global average emissions intensity of oil and gas production drops by around 40% between 2019 and 2 030.
Figure 3.11 ⊳ Changes in the global average emissions intensity of oil and gas operations between 2019 and 2030 in the Sustainable Development Scenario The emissions intensity of both oil and natural gas operations falls by 40% over the next ten years, led by reductions in methane emissions Note: Includes CO 2 and methane emissions from production, processing and transport, but excludes combustion emissions.
Electricity The power sector was responsible for around 13.5 Gt CO 2 emissions in 2019 and is the largest single CO 2-emitting sector worldwide today .
Electr icity demand is set to increase substantially over the next ten years, and reducing emissions from power generation is a 20 40 60 80 100 2019 2030 2019 2030Index (2019=100) Energy -related CO₂ Flaring and venting CO₂ MethaneOil Natural gas IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 107 3 central component of most countries' overall emissions reduction strategies.
In the SDS, CO 2 emissions from electricity generation and heat production drop by more than 40% in the 2019- 30 period , despite global electricity demand increasing by almost 20%.
These reductions are achieved by cutting emissions from existing plants and by ensuring that renewables, nuclear and power plants equipped with carbon capture technologies provide sufficient capacity to meet all electricity demand growth.
Unabated coal -fired power experiences the sharpest fall in emissions of any fuel in the SDS – emissions drop by more than 50% from 2019 to 2030 – with reductions taking place first at the least- efficient coal plants, including through the use of CCUS ( Figure 3.12 ).
Electricity output from t he coal fleet in 2030 trails that of gas -fired power and hydropower, while rising output from wind power and solar PV means that they are closing the gap with coal.
In the SDS, n o new coal -fired power plants without CCUS come online except for those currently under con struction, avoiding more than 200 GW of new coal-fired capacity by 2030 relative to the STEPS.
The fall in emissions from coal -fired generation contributes nearly 60% of the overall reduction of energy -related CO 2 emissions reductions in the SDS.
Figure 3.12 ⊳ CO 2 emissions from coal-fired plants and average annual change by scenario Repurposing plants and the use of CCUS provide 60% of coal -fired emissions reduction s in the SDS; limiting new construction and accelerated retirements provide the remainder Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020; CHP = combined heat and power.
Tackling the legacy of the large fleet of global coal -fired pow er plants is challenging but also presents enormous opportunities to cut CO 2 emissions.
Our proposed three -pronged strategy of retrofitting, repurposing or r etiring coal -fired power plants provides a costeffective way to cut coal -fired emissions by more t han 50% by 2030, taking into consideration each plant 's characteristics and the market in which it operates, as well as economic and energy security implications (IEA, 2019 b).
Retrofitting some coal -fired power plants with CCUS or biomass co -firing, and re purposing others to focus on system adequacy 2 4 6 8 10 2015 2020e 2025 2030Gt CO₂ Repurpose and retrofitRetire early Avoided new plantsSTEPS SDSTotal emissions - 400- 300- 200- 100 0 100Mt CO2 STEPS SDS STEPS SDSNew plants: Existing plants:Subcritical Supercritical Advanced Average annual change by technology, 2019 -30 CHP IEA.
108 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery and flexibility provides around 15 Gt CO 2 of cumulative emission reductions between 2019 and 2030 compared with the STEPS.
A llowing coal -fired plants to continue operating on this basis would help maintain system adequacy and reliability, and would delay or soften the financial impact of closures on owners .
Avoiding new unabated coal -fired generation in the SDS would result in cumulative emissions reductions of around 6 Gt CO 2 in the 2019-30 period .
In syste ms with excess capacity, accelerating retirements could provide an additional 4 Gt of cumulative CO 2 savings .
Global electricity generation from natural gas increases slightly over the next five years, reflecting the importance of coal -to-gas switching as a way of reducing emissions from coal-fired power plants, especially in regions with well -developed natural gas infrastructure.
In the SDS, these emissions savings are reinforced by efforts to limit methane emissions from the production and transport of na tural gas.
Some new gas -fired plants are installed globally, the majority of which are concentrated in developing economies, where they help to provide an alternative to coal -based generation as well as offer a potential pathway to the generation of electr icity from low -carbon gases such as biomethane and hydrogen.
However the main role for gas -fired plants increasingly becomes the provision of power system flexibility to help integrate the increasing share of variable renewables .
Full implementation of the Sustainable Recovery Plan in the SDS leads to an upsurge in investment in all low emissions forms of electricity generation in the coming three years.
Between 2015 and 2019, capital investment in electricity generation from solar, wind, hydropower, nuclea r power, bioenergy and geothermal totalled about $340 billion per year.
Over the next ten years, investment in low emissions power technologies averages more than $650 billion every year, over 90% of which goes to renewable energy technologies.
Solar PV an d wind are favoured for their widespread commercial availability, low costs and mature supply chains, and they capture about $400 billion per year.
Increasing investment and falling unit construction costs greatly expand their markets: solar PV annual capacity additions take place at double the pace of the last four years through to 2025 and keep rising through to 2030 ( Figure 3.13) .
The global market for both onshore and offshore wind also ramps up quickly; and the combined share of solar PV and wind in global generation rises from 8% in 2019 to nearly 30% in 2030.
The increased share of variable renewable electricity generation calls for increased flexibility and solutions such as battery storage.
Hydropower and bioenergy play an important part in helping to meet flexibility needs, and they account for 20% of the low emissions investment total to 2030.
Nuclear power is the second -largest source of low emis sions electricity worldwide today after hydropower.
In advanced economies, where nuclear power is the largest source of low emissions electricity, many nuclear plants are approaching the end of their design lifetimes (40 years in most cases).
Nuclear lifetime extensions are considerably cheaper than new builds and are generally cost competitive with other sources of low emissions electricity, including wind and solar PV.
For countries that have kept the option of using nuclear power, the continued safe operation of most existing plants helps to broadly IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 109 3 maintain nuclear power to 2030 in the SDS.
In emerging market and developing economies, nuclear power doubles by 2030 in the SDS, with established nuclear power programmes expanding in China, Russia, India and the Middle East in particular.
Figure 3.13 ⊳ Average annual solar PV and wind capacity additions in the Sustainable Development Scenario to 2030 The Sustainable Recovery Plan boosts global solar PV and wind power markets in the near term and spurs continued rapid growth in deployment Efficient and reliable electricity networks remain the cornerstone of robust and secure power systems, and around $450 billion is spent on average each year globally over the next ten years to upgrade, modernise and smarten electricity grids in the SDS.
The growing share of variable renewables, the increasing electrification of transport and the scope for deman d response all bring into sharp focus the importance of investment in power sector flexibility.
In the long term, providing flexibility with a minimal level of emissions will be essential to bring power sector emissions towards zero.
There are many options available, and the best mix of technologies will vary according to country -specific circumstances.
Coal - and gas -fired power plants provide the bulk of flexibility today, and there is scope for this to continue for many years in the SDS if they are retrof itted with CCUS.
Dispatchable renewables, nuclear power, energy storage technologies such as thermal storage and batteries, and demand- side management are other important zero -carbon sources of flexibility, and all of them can help to integrate variable renewable electricity generation and lower power system operation costs.
There is around 220 GW of battery storage capacity globally in 2030 in the SDS, compared with 11.5 GW in 2019.
Industry The industry sector was responsible for more than 8.5 Gt CO 2 emis sions in 2019, of which around 70% were from the direct combustion of fossil fuels and the remainder from 50 100 150 200 250 300 2011 -152016 -192020 -252026 -302011 -152016 -192020 -252026 -30GWRest of world Middle East Africa Southeast Asia India China Japan European Union United StatesSolar PV Wind IEA.
110 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery industrial processes, predominantly those involving the production of cement, steel and chemicals.
In the SDS, industry sector emissions fall 15% betw een 2019 and 2030 (compared with a slight increase in the STEPS over this period), led by declines in emissions from the production of iron and steel, cement, and from light industries ( Figure 3.14 ).
Figure 3.14 ⊳ Changes in fuel consumption for energy and feedstock use in industry in the Sustainable Development Scenario, 2019-2030 Coal and oil use decline substantially across all industrial sub- sectors, while efficiency, electrification, natural gas and low -carbon fuels play a growing role Electrification and efficiency processes are responsible for most of the reductions in emissions in the industry sector to 2030 in the SDS.
Implementation of the Sustainable Recovery Plan leads to a significant boost in spending on improv ing the efficiency of industrial facilities through the deployment of improved electric motors, heat pumps and agricultural irrigation pumps, and on wider implementation of energy management systems.
Coal use falls heavily , particularly in the iron and steel and cement sub -sectors, while natural gas use rises marginally , mainly because of growth in the demand for fertilisers and methanol in the chemicals sector .
Material efficiency strategies account for around 15% of the direct emissions reductions relative to the STEPS in the industry sector in 2030.
By 2030, nearly 60% of aluminium and 50% of steel is recycled globally, up from 55% and 40% respectively in 2019.
Despite a temporary setback in plastics recycling policies in the wake of Covid -19, plastics collection rates increase in the SDS from 17% in 2019 to 27% in 2030.
There is also an increase in the use of bioplastics.
The technologies used in bioplastics are still in their infancy today but they account for 5% of total plastics production in the SDS in 2030.
A number o f regions have recently increased their ambitions for low -carbon hydrogen deployment, with a particular focus on industrial sectors.
Although low -carbon hydrogen has a minor impact on emissions to 2030, it becomes more important in later years.
The - 200- 100 0 100 Coal Oil Renewables and hydrogenNatural gasElectricity and heatMtoeLight industries Chemicals Aluminium Paper Cement Iron and steel Net change IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 111 3 Europea n Union Hydrogen Strategy aims to develop hydrogen value chains to reduce emissions across industry (and transport) while boosting economic recovery from Covid -19; Japan has released a Basic Hydrogen Strategy, with targets for hydrogen and fuel cell costs and deployment.
In the SDS, low -carbon hydrogen use in industrial production increases to around 10 Mtoe in 2030: around 5% of ammonia uses low -carbon hydrogen in 2030, as do small fractions of steel and methanol production.
The use of CCUS in industry is important both to reduce industrial process emissions and fossil fuel combustion emissions.
CCUS has continued to gain momentum in 2020, on the back of new funding and project commitments by governments and industry, but its capital -intensive nature and reliance on state support means that the economic downturn from Covid -19 will almost certainly impact investment plans (IEA, 2020d) .
It plays a vital role in emissions reductions to 2030 in the SDS, with around 430 Mt CO 2 of energy -related and industrial process emissions captured in the industry sector in 2030.
Transport Just under 8.5 Gt CO 2 was emitted from the transport sector in 2019.
Emissions fall by around 15% by 2030 in the SDS, the smallest reduction seen in any s ector (emissions rise by more than 5% in the STEPS over this period).
This is because transport activity grows substantially over the next ten years and because of the difficulty in finding alternatives to the use of oil for long -distance transport modes.
The main emissions reductions come from measures that encourage the use of low -carbon fuels, promote the uptake of more efficient vehicles, and reduce transport activity ( Figure 3.15 ).
Figure 3.15 ⊳ CO 2 emissions from selected transport modes in the Sustainable Development Scenario and the Stated Policies Scenario Passenger cars see the largest reduction in emissions to 20 30; oil use in trucks, aviation and shipping is harder to displace, but emissions start to fall slowly from the late 2020s Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
1 2 3 4 2010 2015 2020e 2025 2030Gt CO₂ Aviation ShippingPassenger carsSDS STEPS Historical Projections Trucks IEA.
112 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Full implementation of the Sustainable Recovery Plan leads to total spending over the next three years of around $150 billion on efficient cars and electric vehicles (EVs), nearly $90 billion on long- distance transpo rt, and $30 billion on accelerat ing the deployment of charging infrastructure for electric vehicles, upgrading public transport and improving walking and cycling infrastructure.
Investment in public transport and urban infrastructure continues to rise after 2023, and as a result there are around 5% fewer cars on the road in 2030 in the SDS than in the STEPS.
Improvements in efficiency mean that the average conventional passenger car sold in 2030 consumes 30% less energy than those sold in 2019, while new trucks consume around 20% less fuel.
In 2 030, electric cars account for 40% of total passenger car sales in 2030 (compared with 2.5% in 2019), nearly 70% of two/three wheelers and nearly 30% of buses.
There are more modest increases in sales of heavy- duty vehicles that do not rely on oil: 10% of heavy -duty trucks sold in 2030 are electric and 5% use hydrogen.
The use of sustainable biofuels and low -carbon hydrogen -based fuels will be central to long -term efforts to reduce the use of petroleum products in aviation and maritime shipping.
There are c oncerns about the sustainability of some crop -based conventional biofuels , and this has led to growing interest in the use of biofuels produced from waste and residues that do not give rise to such concerns.
There is also a good deal of interest in hydroge n-based fuels, in particular for use in aviation and maritime shipping, but the production and consumption of these fuels is still in its infancy.
In the SDS, low -carbon fuels account for just over 5% of total fuel consumed by ships in 2030, and just over 10% of fuel in the aviation sector.
The relatively low level of use of these fuels by 2030 means that improvements in vehicle efficiency and logistical optimisation play a key role in the SDS in decoupling activity growth from final energy consumption.
Further developments in battery chemistries would be needed for electricity to play a role in aviation, but even then electricity would probably only be suitable for aviation routes of less than 800 kilometres (IEA, 2020b).
Buildings The direct use of fossil fuels in the b uildings sector resulted in just over 3 Gt CO 2 emissions in 2019, with a further 6.4 Gt indirect emissions coming from the use of electricity and district heat .
Direct e missions fall by more than 20% in the SDS to 2030 (compared with a 7% decline in the STEPS), and total direct and indirect emissions fall by 3.5 Gt CO 2 in the 2019- 30 period.
The electrification of heat and reducing emissions from electricity generation are central to these emissions reductions.
When it comes to space heating, for example, inefficient coal, oil and gas -fired boilers can be replaced with heat pumps, which are increasingly powered by low -carbon electricity in the SDS.
There are also many options to improve the efficiency of buildings and appliances, for example by retrofitting old buildings and improving standards used in new buildings and by ensuring all appliances sold are of the highest efficiency standard.
Fuel switching to the direct use of renewables can also reduce the use IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 113 3 of fossil fuels, for example through the use of solar thermal water heating, biomass and low-carbon gases ( Figure 3.16 ).
Figure 3.16 ⊳ Direct and indirect CO 2 emissions in buildings in the Stated Policies and the Sustainable Development scenarios Reducing emissions from the building sector requires concurrent efforts to improve efficiency and boost low -carbon energy use, especially through low -carbon electricity Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
The Sustainable Recovery Plan provides incentives to replace old and inefficient appliances with more efficient alternatives, speeds up programmes to improve the energy efficiency of new and existing buildings, and provides assistance to m anufacturers to accelerate upgrade s to production lines to produce high er efficiency equipment.
These investments kick-start a more extensive programme of improving the efficiency of new and existing buildings in the SDS.
In total, there is around $270 billion annual spending on efficiency measures in buildings glob ally in the SDS over the next ten years.
This is a significant step up from the $140 billion that was invested on average annually between 2015 and 2019.
Resultant improvements in efficiency across all end -uses in the buildings sector, as well as the achi evement of universal access to clean cooking, see total energy demand in residential buildings in the SDS decline by almost 15% over the 2019 -30 period , despite a 25% increase in the provision of energy services that reflects population and economic growth .
The SDS also sees a major reduction in the direct use of fossil fuels in buildings , with widespread s witching away from gas, oil or coal -fired boilers to renewables, heat pumps or other low -carbon solutions in advanced economies and other regions with la rge space heating energy needs.
In existing buildings, switching away from fossil fuels can have more impact – and save consumers more money – if building s are retrofitted in parallel.
Deep energy retrofits can reduce energy use in an existing building by more than 60 %.
The rate at which buildings are 5 6 7 8 9 10 2015 2020e 2025 2030Gt CO₂ STEPS SDSReduce emissions from electricity and heatEfficiency and fuel switchingRenewables IEA.
114 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery retrofitted accelerates substantially throughout the SDS.
In recent years, less than 1% of the existing building stock received any form of retrofit in any given ye ar: by 2030, this has increased in the SDS to around 2.5% in advanced economies.
This rate ensures that by 2050 – when around 30% of buildings floor space that exists today will still be in use – most buildings will have undergone a deep retrofit.
The inst allation of loft insulation and weatherproofing of buildings are particularly costeffective ways of reducing emissions, and they often offer payback periods of less than three years.
Achieving further emissions reductions in existing buildings require s potentially more costly measures such as triple glazing , façade insulation or wall cavity insulation ; however, these can still provide longer term economic savings, and can also provide health benefits for occupants.
The SDS taps the full potential of the mo st cost -effective efficiency measures to ensure that existing buildings meet net- zero emissions building standards.
Those regions with the highest heating needs, such as Europe, North America, Eurasia and China, see the greatest use of building efficiency improvement measures.
The SDS also sees substantial reductions in energy use and CO 2 emissions in new buildings.
Around 30 % of the worldwide building stock that will exist in 2030 has yet to be built, and in some countries, including India, the figure is over 50%.
However, nearly three -quarters of countries today do not have mandatory energy codes for new buildings.
In the SDS, mandatory energy -related building codes are introduced in all countries and existing codes become more rigorous.
This reduces the average energy intensity of new buildings in the SDS by nearly 50% over the 2019 -30 period.
Passive solutions offer some of the most cost -effective ways to reduce energy use and emissions in new buildings, for example by adapting the orientation of new buildings and using shading and improved glazing to improve thermal comfort.
In certain contexts, passive cooling can entirely remove the need for air conditioning.
Maximising the thermal efficiency of new buildings also requires significant improvements in in sulation, and the SDS sees early action to increase insulation efficiency standards for new buildings, reflecting an awareness that it is cheaper to insulate new buildings than to retrofit existing buildings.
Heat pumps meet close to one -quarter of heating needs in all new buildings built in the next ten years in the SDS, while other low -carbon options meet another 10%.
There is also a substantial reduction in indirect emissions from appliances and air conditioners in the SDS.
At present they account for 60% of electricity demand and almost 40% of total CO 2 emissions in the buildings sector, and the number of them in use is expected to increase substantially in the coming years.
By 2030, however, household appliances and air conditioners in the SDS are on a verage 1 0% more efficient than 2019.
This limits the increase in electricity demand, reduc es stresses on power systems, and keeps consumer bills lower than they otherwise would be .
By achieving universal access to clean cooking by 2030, the SDS also helps to reduce GHG emissions by ending the inefficient combustion and polluting use of biomass in cooking that today results in large levels of methane and nitrous dioxide (N 2O) emissions.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 115 3 more than 50% of those gaining access to clean cooking in the SDS do so with low -carbon or electric solutions.
LPG stoves also play a central part in achieving universal access, and they do so without compromising climate goals.
The use of LPG as a cooking fuel in the SDS increases CO 2 emissions globally by around 75 Mt CO 2 but avoids almost 160 Mt CO 2-eq of methane and over 20 Mt CO 2-eq of N 2O emissions.
3.4.4 Investment and finance The average annual level of energy sector investment in the late 2020s in the SDS is around 60% higher than in the past f ive years.
More than three -quarters of the average annual $3 trillion that is required over the 2025 -30 period in the SDS goes to clean energy and electricity networks ( Figure 3.17 ).
Renewables -based power investment doubles to over $600 billion a year, supported by additional spending on the expansion and modernisation of electricity networks and battery storage, while nuclear investment rises by 80%.
Spending on more efficient buildings, industrial processes and transport accounts for 60% of the increase in demand -side investment, while s pending also increases on emerging technologies such as EVs and CCUS , in order to support emissions reduction efforts in transport and industry.
Annual investment for universal energy access in the period to 2030 totals around $35 billion for electricity and $6 billion for clean cooking.
Figure 3.17 ⊳ Average annual energy investment in the Sustainable Development Scenario Investment in fuels and power is marked by a major reallocation of capital towards renewables and electricity networks; demand -side investment increases substantially Note: Other end -use includes CCUS in industry, spending to meet the incremental cost of EVs and investment in private EV charging infrastructure.
The ability to mobilise investments in line with the SDS will depend on the availability of finance from a diverse range of actors and instruments, and that in turn will depend in part on appropriate policy design.
Investment in some clean energy sectors has remained 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.42015-20 2021-25 2026-30 2015-20 2021-25 2026-30 2015-20 2021-25 2026-30Oil Natural gas Coal Biofuels and biogases Fossil fuels without CCUS Fossil fuels with CCUS Nuclear Renewables Networks Battery storage Renewables Efficiency OtherPower Trillion dollars (2019)End-useFuels IEA.
116 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery resilient in the face of the Covid -19 downturn, and with great er focus on aligning financial flows with sustainability, there is scope to scale up such investment over the next decade .
However, funding and financing pressures have increased in many countries in the wake of Covid -19, particularly in some emerging mark et and developing economies, and clean energy technologies have generally not featured prominently in the Covid -19 recovery plans announced to date .
Role of private and public sources and capital structures in investment State -owned enterprises (SOEs) acc ounted for over 35% of investment in 2019, but many face severe financial strains.
In emerging market and developing economies, SOEs account for 90% of grid spending and their credit worthiness affects nearly all electricity -related transactions.
They remain important in the development and utilisation of fossil fuel assets: for example, more than 60% of coal power finance comes from SOEs and public finance institutions.
Some SOEs are making efforts to diversify.
NTPC, a power SOE in India, has signalled a shift towards solar PV.
Equinor in Norway has become an important developer of offshore wind and CCUS, including for hydrogen production.
But there are questions over how the strategies of some SOEs will evolve.
Brazil's Petrobras divested its renewables business to focus on oil and gas, while the power planning of the Indonesian electricity company PLN foresees a bigger role for fossil -based power over the next decade.
China's SOE power companies face increased debt burdens and profitability risks from co al generation , but authorities continue to approve the building of new coal -fired power plants.
While SOEs remain important, over 70% of investment over the next decade in sectors critical to the clean energy transition in the SDS comes from privately owned projects, and these projects play an especially important part in the scaling up of renewable power, efficiency and new technologies ( Figure 3.18 ).
Governments play a critical role in mobilising private investment in the SDS.
Investment in clean energy fuels and technologies in particular depends to a large extent on the existence of appropriate regulatory frameworks, infrastructure planning, market design and fiscal incentives.
Public finance sources, including development and green banks as well as infrastructure and clean energy funds, play important complementary roles in financial derisking and in acting as vehicles for capital disbursement from recovery packages.
A greater supply of finance from a wider range of actors as well as instruments that align with the capital requirements of energy companies and assets would help to boost investment in clean energy.
While most energy investments today are funded directly from corporate and consumer balance sheets, secondary sources of finance from banks and the capital markets are likely to take on increased importance in the face of current pressures on retained earnings.
This is, however, likely to pose its own challenges: banks have to contend with lending limits, and equity and debt capital markets remain underdeveloped in a number of key markets.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 117 3 Figure 3.18 ⊳ Clean energy-related investment in the Sustainable Development Scenario, 2025-2030 Over 70% of clean energy- related investment comes from priva te sources, with public finance and policy design critical to mobilising vehicles that meet diverse financing needs Notes: The ownership analysis is based on estimates of the share of investment carried out by SOEs and government sponsors (public sources) compared with that led by private actors.
The instrument analysis is based on the mix of debt and equity that developers, households and project companies use to finance their investments.
Estimates are based on current observed capital structures by sector, derived from financing data on companies and consumers (for balance sheet financing ) and assets (for project finance), applied to SDS investment projections; equity includes grants.
The capital structure of investments in the SDS points to a greater role for debt finance than is the case in the STEPS.
This stems both from the relative sh ift from investment in fuels to investment in the electricity sector, and from the increased overall level of investment in end- use sectors.
Electricity sector investment typically relies on debt more than investment in fuels does, and some end -use sectors also rely to a considerable degree on debt financing, such efficiency improvements in housing and commercial buildings.
Debt also plays a greater role in advanced economies where corporate and consumer credit is more developed.
Improvements in energy -intensive industrial sectors – including iron and steel, chemicals and cement – tend however to be financed with more equity.
Scaling up private investment means mobilising financial vehicles – debt, equity and grants – to match the capital structure of energy companies and assets.
Around half of investment needs in the SDS come from debt at a time when global debt -to-GDP levels are on the rise.
Many advanced economies are set for an extended period of very low borrowing costs, due to structural factors and loo sened monetary policies in the wake of Covid -19, and this may help to reduce the costs of deploying clean energy technologies.
Conversely, however, borrowing risks have increased in a number of emerging market and developing economies, where the availability of debt to finance low- carbon power and flexible infrastructure is a critical element in the SDS.
20% 40% 60% 80% 100%Low-carbon power Grids and storage Buildings Industry Transport Low-carbon power Grids and storage Buildings Industry TransportPrivate Advanced economies Rest of world Equity Advanced economies Rest of worldInvestment by ownership Investment by instrumentPublic Debt IEA.
118 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery There is also potential for capital structures to evolve over time.
For some sectors and revenue models, such as solar PV and wind based on long -term fixed price contracts, there is the potential for equity shares to rise as government incentives are reduced and as projects take on higher degrees of market risk to support system integration goals (see Chapter 6).
For more nascent sectors, such as battery storage and CCUS, capital needs are likely to be initially based more on balance sheet finance and equity, but with the potential for project finance structures and debt shares to rise as projects develop a track record with banks and as reliable cash flows emerge that can match liabilities for bond issuance.
Bridging investment gaps requires an expansion of the investor base for clean energy, together with strategies to address key financing constraints and lower the cost of capital (Table 3.1).
New facilities and risk capital may be needed to address funding constraints that threaten initial project development, especially in emerging market and developing economies, and to help en sure the availability of long- term debt from commercial banks to fund operations.
This is likely to involve targeted public finance from development banks and others together with investment framework reforms and policies that help to attract large -scale p rivate funds.
Table 3.1 ⊳ Key financing issues and strategies to bridge investment gaps Issue Potential financial strategies Potential benefits Examples Constraints on early stage project development funds in newer markets .
Provision of early stage growth, first -loss, subordinated equity; project preparation facilities and facilitation; convertible grants.
Stamp of approval for financial close; capacity building for developers and banks.
Southeast Asia Clean Energy Facility; Seed Capital Assistance Facility ; Private Financing Advisory Network.
Availability of bank debt , particularly in developing markets , for assets with less certain cash flows, and for consumers .
Credit enhancement with syndicated, subordinated or concessional loans, longer tenures, guarantees , insurance; standardised loan products .
Improve bankability, lower debt costs ; boost share of debt; capacity building for lenders.
Scaling Solar; Connect Africa; EU Energy Efficient Mortgages Initiative.
Lack of investment in clean energy projects by institutional investors .
More scale and transparency for unlisted assets; coinvestment strategies; aggregation/warehousing of assets and securitisation .
Reduce costs; support capital recycling; finance for smaller assets ; crowd -in local financiers.
Climate Investment Coalition; Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund.
Aligning f inancial flows from capital markets to fund sustainable development goals .
Enhancing scale, liquidity, transparency of listed equity/bond markets; robust sustainability frameworks, labelling and instruments.
Improved fundraising and liquidity; embedding sustainability in corporate strategies .
EU Sustainable Finance Action Plan; UK Green Finance Strategy ; Net -Zero Investment Framework.
Institutional investors represent a major potential source of long -term finance.
Their participation is likely to depend on policies and measures that facilitate large -scale direct investment into unlisted assets as well as routes to invest through public markets (such as IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable rec overy 119 3 the aggregation of smaller projects into listed securities).
Investor acquisition and refinancing activity may subsequently create opportunities for reinvestment of scarce development capital .
Still, debt and equity capital markets , as wel l as direct investment opportunities, remain underdeveloped in many markets around the world and they are not always geared to support long -term sustainability goals.
A number of efforts are underway to enhance sustainable finance flows, while new instruments such as green and sustainability linked bonds provide options to fund growing debt needs ( Box 3.4 ).
Their impact depends on the extent to which such efforts reinforce decision making that supports real capital formation for clean energy projects and emissions reductions.
Box 3.4 ⊳ Can sustainable finance help to meet investment goals?
There have been increasing efforts by investors and policy makers in recent years to incorporate sustainability issues into the decision making of actors in financial markets, and sustainable finance has become much more readily available.
In the past five years, the total value of environmental, social and governance (ESG) funds has tripled to over $1 trillion, and nearly $ 530 billion of sustainable bonds and loans were issued globally in 2019 (Figure 3.19 ).
Many ESG funds performed relatively well financially during the Covid -19 crisis, and sustainable debt, in some cases, has demonstrated lower default risk than less sustainable alternatives.
Governments are now issuing increasing amounts of debt to fund new fiscal measures in the wake of Covid -19, and there is growing interest in how these bonds could be used to fund more sustainable recoveri es.
A variety of sustainable finance initiatives and activities have helped underpin this recent growth, including efforts to:  Identify and evaluate the financial risks arising from clean energy transitions.
This requires increased disclosure and new assessment tools.
Countries including France have mandated reporting, while the Task Force on Climate -Related Financial Disclosures and central banks has suggested voluntary measures.
Canada is tying Covid -19-related aid for large companies to commitments on climate disclosure.
 Increase corporate attention to climate -related risks through shareholder resolutions and the development of new investment products.
For example, Climate Action 100+ brings together investors who seek to focus corporate attention on 2050 net -zero goals; other groups are seeking to develop new sustainability -focused funds comprised of companies that meet certain ESG criteria.
 Assess the impact of investments on sustainability.
This includes the development of processes that aim to help investors align their debt and equity portfolios with emissions reductions and clean energy targets, and that support stakeholder and market engagement.
 Develop guidance to support the identification and classification of activities that would achieve defined sustainability or environmental criteria.
In the European Union, for example, the Sustainable Finance Action Plan includes a set of criteria for IEA.
120 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery classifying finance activities based on long -term net -zero goals.
China has a strategy with similar featur es, though with different criteria, while initiatives are under consideration in Canada, India, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico and South Africa.
Figure 3.19 ⊳ Sustainable debt issuance and types of issuers Sustainable debt issuance has surged, mostly for efficiency and renewables projects, but rapid growth has not yet translated into rising clean energy capex Source: IEA analysis based on data from Bloomberg (2020); BNEF (2020); Climate Bonds Initiative (2020).
Despite these positive developments, the growth in sustainable finance has not yet translated into a rapid rise in clean energy capital expenditure.
There are many possible reasons for this.
Investors often have liquidity and scale requirements, and it can be difficult for them to find projects that meet their requirements; they look for evidence that potential opportunities are underpinned by firm government support for transition pathways, a nd are not always convinced; and they have been further hampered by a degree of fragmentation in the development of sustainable finance markets.
A further issue is that publicly listed companies – those that are most accountable to investors – are responsible for less than a quarter of global CO 2 emissions today, limiting the potential impact of investor pressure without additional routes to investing in unlisted companies and assets.
One difficulty with translating sustainable finance into clean energy expenditure is that it can be challenging to ensure that standards deliver desired outcomes.
For example, many existing sustainability standards exclude businesses based on fossil fuel supply or consumption, or disregard options that reduce emissions but d o not fit neatly into the classification of a "green" company or activity.
To alleviate this concern, a new market instrument called "transition bonds" is being marketed to help issuers with high carbon footprints (e.g.
oil and gas companies or energy -intensive industries) fund improvements.
Bonds that link financial performance to environmental outcomes rather than the specific use of proceeds (e.g.
"sustainability linked bonds") have emerged as the fastest growing category of sustainable debt issuance in recent years.
100 200 300 400 500 600 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Jan-AugBillion dollars (2019) Green bond Green loan Sustainability bond Sustainability-linked debtBy type of debt instrument Commercial finance 17%Development finance 8%Governments 20%Others 7% Utilities, Power, Renewables 31% Industry and Manufacturing 3% Other companies 14%Corporate 48%By type of issuer IEA.
Chapter 3 | Building on a sustainable recovery 121 3 3.4.5 Trends after 2030 Global energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions in the SDS fall by around 830 Mt on average each year over the 2019 -30 period.
Over the following 20 years, they fall by around 840 Mt on average each year, and in 2 050 they total 9.8 Gt ( Figure 3.20 ).
This 20-year period sees continued large emissions reductions in the electricity sector, together with a stepp ing up of efforts to reduce emissions in end -use sectors.
By 2050, remaining emissions are mostly concentrated in sectors where they are technically challenging or very costly to abate directl y.
The industry and transport sectors both account for around 35 % of direct energy sector CO 2 emissions in 2050, compared with around 25% for each sector in 2019.
Figure 3.20 ⊳ Direct CO 2 emissions reductions in selected sectors in the Sustainable Development Scenario The period after 2030 sees continued emissions reductions across the energy sector, with a stepping up of efforts in the transport and buildings sectors The CO 2 emission reduction trends that were visible prior to 2030 – most notably in efficiency and electrification – continue in the period to 2050.
These emissions t rends are consistent with achieving net -zero energy sector CO 2 emissions globally by 2070, althou gh a number of industries, sub -sectors and countries fall to net- zero well in advance of this date (see Chapter 4).
Efficiency measures continue to play a central role , and between 2030 and 2050 total primary energy demand falls globally by around 5%, desp ite the world's population increasing by around 1.2 billion people and the global economy expanding by around 75%.
Global electricity demand also continues to expand by 2% per year, which is similar to the pace of growth between 2020 and 2030, as electrifi cation extends to an increasing number of sectors and regions.
For example, nearly 70% of the passenger cars sold in the 2030 -50 period in the SDS are electric .
Electricity generation is also increasingly low carbon: two -thirds of the capacity installed gl obally between 2030 and 2050 is wind 5 10 15 2019 2050 2019 2050 2019 2050 2019 2050Gt CO₂2019-30 2030-40 2040-50 Power Industry Transport Buildings IEA.
122 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery and solar PV.
Maintaining the pace of global emissions reductions after 2030 also requires enhanced efforts in the hard- to-abate sector s (e.g.
aviation and maritime shipping), and a greater role for new low -carbon liquids and gases such as hydrogen and biomethane.
The value chain for low -carbon hydrogen comprises many technologies, and these are at very different stages of maturity.
Prior to 2030, there is considerable investment in hydrogen innovation and deployment, stimulated by programmes such as the European Union Hydrogen Strategy and Japan's Basic Hydrogen Strategy, which are fully incorporated into the SDS.
These help to reduce costs and expand the opportunities for hydrogen, and this yields important results in t he long term.
In the SDS, around 50 Mtoe of low -carbon hydrogen is produced globally in 2030, and this rises to 470 Mtoe in 2050, most of it produced through the use of low -carbon electricity and CCUS -equipped natural gas reformers.
Nearly 60% of this is consumed in the transport sector, mainly for trucks and shipping ; 20% is used in the industry sector, mainly to produce low -carbon steel, ammonia and methanol ; and 15% is used in buildings, mainly for space heating.
Around 380 Mtoe of biofuels and more than 300 Mtoe of biomethane and biogas are also consumed globally in the SDS in 2050.
CCUS plays a large role in continuing the pace of emissions reduction after 2030.
In the SDS, around 850 Mt CO 2 of emissions are captured globally through CCUS in 2030; by 2050, this has risen to around 5 000 Mt CO 2.
Around one -third of this is captured in the power sector, mainly in China and the United States.
The remainder is captured in the transformation and industry sectors, where CCUS is one of the few technology options available today that is able to bring about deep emissions reductions in industrial processes, including in steel and cement production.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 123 Chapter 4 Achiev ing net -zero emissions by 2050 What would be needed over the next decade?
• Several countries have introduced targets to achieve net -zero emissions by 2050.
These targets are included and achieved in the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) , but increasingly attention is turning to what it would mean for the energy sector globally to reach net -zero emissions by 2050.
This is examined in a new case in this Outl ook, called Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE2050) .
• Decisions over the next decade will play a critical role in determining the pathway to 2050.
For this reason, we examine what the NZE2050 would mean for the years through to 2030.
Total CO 2 emissions would need to fall by around 45% from 2010 levels by 2030, meaning that energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions would need to be around 20.1 Gt, or 6.6 Gt lower than in the SDS in 2030.
• Realising the pace and scale of emissions reductions in the NZE2050 would require a far-reaching set of actions going above and beyond the already ambitious measures in the SDS.
A large number of unparalleled changes across all parts of the energy sector would need to be realised simultaneously, at a time when the world is trying to recover from the Covid -19 pandemic.
• Primary energy demand in the NZE2050 falls by 17% between 2019 and 2030, to a level similar to 20 06, even though the global economy is twice as large .
Electrification, efficiency gains and behaviour change s are central to achieving this.
Coal demand falls by almost 60% over this period to a level last seen in the 1970s.
• CO 2 emissions from the power sector decline by around 60% in the NZE2050 between 2019 and 2030.
Worldwide annual solar PV additions in the NZE2050 expand from 110 GW in 2019 to nearly 500 GW in 2030, while virtually no subcritical and supercritical coal plants without CCUS are still operating in 2030.
The share of renewables in global electricity supply rises from 27% in 2019 to 60% in 2030 in the NZE2050, and nuclear power generates just over 10%, while the share provided by coal plants without CCUS falls sharply from 37% in 2019 to 6% in 2030.
Power sector investment nearly triples from $760 billion in 2019 to $2 200 billion in 2030, with more than one -third spent to expand, modernise and digitalise electricity networks.
• CO 2 emissions from end -uses in the NZE2050 fall by one -third between 2019 and 2030.
Close to half of the existing building stock in advanced economies is retrofitted by 2030, and one -third is retrofitted elsewhere.
Half of all air conditio ners sold globally between 2020 and 20 30 are the most efficient models available.
Over 50% of passenger cars sold in 2030 are electric , up from 2.5% in 2019.
Around 25% of total heat used in industry in the NZE2050 in 2030 comes from electricity and low -carbon fuels such as hydrogen, up from negligible levels today.
124 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Global battery manufacturing capacity would need to double every two years, and hydrogen production and distribution infrastructure would need to ramp up substantially.
• Addressing emissions from existing infrastructure would be unavoidable in the NZE2050.
In addition to investment in technologies, such as CCUS, low -carbon gases and buildings retrofits, behaviour changes would form an integral part of the emissions reduction strategy.
We have examined 11 individual measures related to behaviour, which in total would reduce CO 2 emissions by 2 Gt in 2030 in the NZE2050.
The majority of these reductions are in the transport sector.
Exam ples include replacing flights under one hour with low -carbon alternatives, walking or cycling instead of driving by car for trips under 3 km, and reducing road traffic speeds by 7 km/h.
If implemented in full today, these measures would reduce transport s ector CO 2 emissions by more than 20%.
These are illustrative measures, and not all of them would be possible for everyone, but they highlight the importance of behaviour changes for NZE2050, and the scale of what is needed.
Figure 4.1 ⊳ Energy and industrial process CO 2 emissions and reduction levers in the scenarios An unparalleled transformation of the energy sector and major behaviour changes in the next ten years would be needed to achieve global net -zero emissions by 2050 Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
• Analysis of existing net -zero commitments provides a number of useful lessons for global efforts, and suggests that: a net -zero ca rbon power system requires careful long -term and integrated planning; electrification is central to emissions reduction efforts but low -carbon fuels such as hydrogen are also needed; it will be very difficult to eliminate emissions entirely from specific s ub-sectors ; there is an urgent need to boost support for technology innovation ; and it will be critical to engage with consumers to ensure public acceptance and energy affordability.
15 20 25 30 35 40 2015 2020e 2025 2030Gt CO₂ Power End-use BehaviourSTEPS NZE2050SDS IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 125 4 4.1 Introduction The Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) sets out a n energy future that simultaneously achieves the three main energy -related UN Sustainable Development Goals on access, air pollution and climate change.
Full access to electricity and clean cooking is achieved by 2030 and there is a substantial reduction in the three main air pollutants, leading to significant improvements in air quality and a reduction in premature deaths.
Energy sector and industrial process carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions in the SDS fall continuously over the period to 2050 from around 3 3 gigatonnes (Gt) in 2020 to 26.7 Gt in 2030 and 10 Gt in 2050, on course towards global net -zero CO 2 emissions by 2070.
If emissions were to remain at zero from this date, the SDS would provide a 50% probability of limiting the temperature rise to less th an 1.65 °C, in line with the Paris Agreement objective of "holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C".
If negative emissions technologies are deployed after 2070 in the SDS, the temperature rise in 2100 could be limited to 1.5 °C with a 50% probability.
A number of countries, jurisdictions and companies have announced targets or goals to achieve net -zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050.
The SDS assumes that these net-zero goals are reached in full.
Questions are increasingly now being asked about whether net -zero emissions could be achieved globally well before 2070, and in particular what it would mean for the energy sector to achieve this by 2050.
If the possibility of a large level of net negative emissions at a global level is ruled out , then CO 2 emissions would need to fall to zero globally by around 2050 to have a 50% chance of limiting the long- term average global temperature rise to 1.5 °C (IPCC, 2018) .
Based on detailed modelling, w e have constructed a new case – called Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE2050) – to examine what would be needed over the next ten years to put CO 2 emissions on a pathway to net -zero globally by 2050.
Achieving this pathway would be extremely challenging, but would make a significant dif ference in terms of reducing the risks of damaging climate change: it would also bring other benefits in the form of improved air quality, universal energy access and the development of new industrial capacities.
This chapter examines three specific topic s:  NZE2050 case: Energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions in this case fall to around 20 Gt in 2030, on track to net zero by 2050.
We analyse the energy sector transformation needed to achieve this, including the rate of deployment of clean energ y technologies and the investment levels that would be required, as well as the implications for global energy demand and the fuel mix.
 Contribution of behaviour changes to CO 2 emissions reductions in the NZE2050: Covid -19 has highlighted how behaviours can change in response to an urgent and immediate crisis.
We examine the potential impacts on CO 2 emissions of 11 possible changes to people's behaviour and lifestyles, and the implications of these impacts for the NZE2050.
Figures and tables from this cha pter are accessible through your IEA account : .
126 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery  Insights from existing commitments to reduce emissions to net- zero by 2050: There are a number of different ways in which jurisdictions that have announced goals to reduce emissions to net -zero emissions by 2050 plan to achieve these targets.
Their proposed pathways provide some important insights into what would be needed to achieve this globally by 2050.
4.2 A pathway towards global net -zero emissions in 2050 If total CO 2 emissions are to fall to net -zero in 2050, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C (IPCC SR1.5) indicates that energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions would need to fall to around 16.8-22.1 Gt in 2030, with a median value of 20.1 Gt (IPCC, 2018) .1 The IPCC indicates that this would provide a pathway towards a 50% chance of limiting the global average surface temperature rise to 1.5 °C without a large level of net negative emissions globally.
The SDS projects around 26.7 Gt CO 2 emissions in 2030, a nd so emissions would need to be 6.6 Gt lower in 2030 to be on the pathway towards net -zero emissions in 2050.
We have carried out detailed analysis to understand what reducing emissions to 20.1 Gt in 2030 would mean for the deployment of clean energy tech nologies, consumers, overall investment levels and demand for fossil fuels.
As well as reducing emissions to this level, the NZE2050 simultaneously delivers universal access to energy by 2030 and a major reduction in air pollutant emissions, as is the case in the SDS.
2 Our starting point for the NZE2050 is how to reduce emissions in 2030 by a further 6.6 Gt CO 2 from the levels in the SDS.
We consider the technology and behaviour changes that could best fill this gap.
Behaviour changes (discussed in detail i n section 4.3) reduce energy -related activity in the NZE2050 and this reduces emissions from the level in the SDS by 2 Gt CO 2 in 2030 .
The remaining 4.6 Gt CO 2 require a broad set of very ambitious and coordinated policies to be implemented by all countri es worldwide (Roelfsema et al., 2020; Kaufman et al., 2020) .
The power sector delivers 2.5 Gt of these reductions, while additional changes in end- use sectors provide the additional 2.1 Gt in 2030 (Figure 4.2).
These additional emissions reductions require the already ambitious energy sector transformation in the SDS to 2030 to be significantly extended and accelerated.
They could only be realised with a step -change in ambition and action by policy makers, industries and 1 In the IPCC SR1.5, 1.5 °C scenarios are categorised as those with "no or limited temperature overshoot", if temperatures temporarily exceed 1.5 °C by less than 0.1 °C before returning to less than 1.5 °C in 2100, and those with a "higher overshoot", if temperatures temporarily exceed 1.5 °C by 0.1 -0.4 °C before returning to less than 1.5 °C in 2100.
Emissions figures are taken from Table 2.4 of IPCC SR1.5 for CO 2 emissions from fossil fuels and industry for 1.5 °C pathways with no or limited temperature overshoot.
Energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions of 20.1 Gt in 2030 are consistent with a 45% reduction in global net anthropogenic CO 2 emissions from 2010 levels by 2030.
2 The NZE2050 case has a similar level of emissions reductions to the P2 "illus trative pathway" in the IPCC SR 1.5.
The P2 scenario is described as " a scenario with … shifts towards sustainable and healthy consumption patterns, low -carbon technology innovation, and well- managed land systems with limited societal acceptability for BECCS [Bioenergy equipped with carbon capture, utilisation and storage]".
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 127 4 financial markets, supported by close international and cross -border collaboration.
Deployment rates of technologies – most notably a major ramp up in efficiency and fuel switching to low -emission electricity and low -carbon fuels – are pushed to their limits in order to achieve these reductions while ensuring that energy service demands can continue to be satisfied.
There is also a step -change in the speed at which technology innovation occurs and the scale at which critical technologies such as carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS), hydrogen and small modular nuclear reactors are deployed.
Figure 4.2 ⊳ CO 2 emissions reductions by sector in the NZE2050, 2019-2030 The power sector leads emissions reductions in the NZE2050, and helps to reduce emissions more widely as end -use sectors electrify; industry is the largest emitting sector in 2030 Note: There are around 0.2 Gt additional CO 2 emissions reductions in the NZE2050 compared with the SDS in agriculture and energy sector own use.
4.2.1 Primary energy demand and total final consumption Total primary energy demand in the NZE2 050 falls to just under 12 000 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe) in 2030, 17% lower than in 2019.
By 2030, primary energy demand in the NZE2050 is at a level similar to 2006, while the economy is more than double the size.
This is achieved through a combination of electrification, increased energy and material efficiency, and behaviour changes that reduce the demand for energy services.
As a result, the primary energy intensity of gross domestic product ( GDP) falls by 4.5 % on average each year to 2030 in the NZE2050.
Between 2015 and 2019, global primary energy intensity fell on average by less than 2 % each year ( Figure 4.3).
Total final energy consumption in 2030 in the NZE2050 is around 15% lower than in 2019 (Figure 4.4).
Part of this reduction comes from the electrification of end- use sectors and the major efficiency gains that this brings.
In the NZE2050, more than half of passenger cars sold in 2030 are el ectric ; this reduces energy consumption because e lectric cars are up to five-times more efficient than internal combustion engine cars.
In the buildings sector, 5 10 15 2019 2030 2019 2030 2019 2030 2019 2030Gt CO₂ Reductions in SDS Energy system changes Behaviour changesAdditional reductions in NZE2050:Power Industry Transport Buildings IEA.
128 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery close to 100 million additional households are heated with electric heat pumps rather than natu ral gas or oil in the NZE2050; heat pumps are more than four -times more efficient than fossil fuel -fired boilers.
In industry, almost one -third of low temperature heat (<100 ° C) in the NZE2050 is electrified by 2030; the use of heat pumps to produce low te mperature heat in industry is up to five -times more efficient than conventional boilers.
In total, electricity increases its share in final energy consumption from 19% in 2019 to 28% by 2030 in the NZE2050 (the SDS achieves a level of 24% in 2030).
Figure 4.3 ⊳ Primary energy demand in the scenarios Energy efficiency improvements accelerate in the NZE2050, but shifts in the composition of energy demand are the major contributor to emissions reductions beyond SDS levels Note: 2020e = estimate d values for 2020; toe = tonne of oil equivalent; PPP = purchasing power parity.
Figure 4.4 ⊳ Total final energy consumption by sector in the NZE2050 End- use sector CO 2 emissions fall by one -third in the NZE2050 though to 2030 0.060.080.100.120.14 2010 2020e 2030toe per $1 000, PPP STEPS SDS NZE2050Energy intensity -5 000-2 50002 500 STEPS SDS NZE2050MtoeRenewables Nuclear Traditional use Natural gas Oil CoalChange in energy demand, 2019 -30 of biomass 510 2010 2030 Gt CO2 2010 2030 CO₂ emissions (right axis)1 0002 0003 0004 000 2010 2030Mtoe Coal Oil Natural gas Electricity Heat Hydrogen Bioenergy Other renewablesIndustry Buildings Transport IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 129 4 Reductions in final energy consumption go beyond ele ctrification.
Achieving universal access to clean cooking in the NZE2050 by 2030 leads to large reductions in energy use in the buildings sector.
Cooking with a liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) stove uses around fivetimes less energy than cooking with the tr aditional use of biomass in inefficient stoves , and energy use for cooking more than halves globally in the 2019 -30 period.
Retrofitting buildings alongside the deployment of heat pumps also allow for major efficiency gains in buildings.
In total, the comb ination of electrification and improvements in efficiency in the NZE2050 means that fossil fuel demand for space heating falls by nearly 330 Mtoe between 2019 and 2030 while demand for electricity rises by around 20 Mtoe.
In addition , there is a rapid incr ease in sales of the most efficient household appliances available: for example, half of air conditioners sold globally between 2020 and 2030 in the NZE2050 are the most efficient models available.
In the transport sector, oil use declines by around 45% t o 2030, mainly because of behaviour changes, the rapid increase in sales of electric vehicles (EVs) and continued efficiency improvements in conventional vehicles.
In industry, coal use falls by more than 30% between 2019 -30, mainly because of the electrification of heat demand.
Figure 4.5 ⊳ Differences in fossil fuel demand in the scenarios in 2030 Declines in fossil fuel use in the SDS are further extended in the NZE2050.
By 2030, coal use is 55% lower in the NZE2050 than the STEPS, oil is 40% lower and natural gas is 20% lower .
The reduction in energy demand in the NZE2050 results in large changes to the trajectory of future fossil fuel demand ( Figure 4.5).
In particular, global coal demand falls by almost 60% between 2019 and 2030 in the NZE2050 to less than 2 300 million tonnes of coal equivalent, taking the size of the global coal market back to where it was in the 1970s.
More than 80% of the decline in total coal demand comes from a reduction in the use of coal in the power sector.
The speed of this reduction would risk large job loss es in coal mining and coal -fired power plants and, unless carefully managed, could lead to wider social implications in local economies and communities.
Investment in clean energy 1 0002 0003 0004 0005 000 STEPS SDS NZE2050 STEPS SDS NZE2050 STEPS SDS NZE2050Mtoe Change from STEPS to SDS Change from SDS to NZE2050Oil Natural gas Coal IEA.
130 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery technologies could create a large number of new jobs, though a comprehensive communication strategy and well -resourced reskilling and regional revitalisation programmes would be required to enable workers in incumbent industries to find attractive alternative livelihoods (IEA, 2020a) .
Equipping coal -fired plants with CCUS would help avoid the early retirement of a large number of coal power plants, part of a threepronged strategy to repurpose, retrofit or retire coal -fired power plants to align the use of these plants with sustainability goals while supporting energy security (IEA , 2019a).
CCUS is used to capture emissions from around 270 Mtoe of fossil fuel consumption in the NZE2050 in 2030, or 3.5% of total fossil fuel consumption in that year.
A round 1 150 million tonnes ( Mt) of energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emission s are captured : most come from industry and energy transformation processes, with around 40% of the total coming from the power sector.
There is a small amount of bioenergy equipped with CCUS (BECCS) , which removes just over 35 Mt CO 2 from the atmosphere i n 2030 (Box 4.1).
Box 4.1 ⊳ How do changes over the next ten years compare with the IPCC 1.5 °C scenarios?
The IPCC assessed 90 scenarios with at least a 50% chance of limiting warming in 2100 to 1.5 °C.3 These use a wide range of different macroeconomic assumptions (called shared socioeconomic pathways [SSP])4 to describe ways in which the world could evolve in the absence of any climate policies.
Lower economic and population growth tend to translate into lower energy demand and emissions.
The macroeconomic factors in the SDS and NZE2050 are most similar to a "middle -of-the-road" scenario in terms of population and GDP growth ("SSP2").
Most of the scenarios assessed by the IPCC that limit the temperature to 1.5 °C assume a lower level of population and economic growth than in the SDS and the NZE2050.
It is also possible to compare a number of other outputs:  The NZE2050 has higher primary energy demand than around two -thirds of the IPCC 1.5 ° C scenarios in 2030 (Figure 4.6).
 The CO 2 intensity of electricity generation in the NZE2050 falls by about 10% per year on average between 2019 -30; in IPCC 1.5 °C scenarios, there is an implied reduction of around 5 -15% per year over this period.
 Nuclear power plays a much larger role in many IPCC 1.5 °C scenarios than in the NZE2050; half of IPCC 1.5 °C scenarios imply an increase in nuclear generation of 60% between 2019 -30 (compared with a 36% increase in the NZE2050).
 In 2030, renewables provide 60% of global electricity supply in the NZE2050, a larger share than is the case in around 80% of the IPCC 1.5 °C scenarios.
3 These 90 scenarios include 53 model pathways with no or limited temperature overshoot and 37 scenarios that have a higher overshoot.
4 The SSPs are a self -consistent set of assumptions covering macroeconomic trends such as population growth, economic growth, urbanisation and land use.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 131 4  Oil use in 2030 in the NZE2050 is less than around three -quarters of the IPCC 1.5 °C scenarios; natural gas use in 2030 is less than around half of the scenarios; and coal use in 2030 is less than around 30% of the scenarios.
 The amount of CO 2 captured with CCUS in 2030 in the NZE2050 (1 150 Mt) is less than the level captured in half of the IPCC 1.5 °C scenarios.
The 35 Mt CO 2 captured through BECCS in 2030 in the NZE2050 is less than the level captured in 60% of the scenarios.
Figure 4.6 ⊳ Global primary energy demand and CO 2 emissions in 2030 Some 1.5 °C scenarios have very large reductions in energy use over the next ten years; the NZE2050 assumes lower energy use than about one -third of 1.5 °C scenarios in 2030 Sources: IEA analysis based on IAMC 1.5 °C Scenario Explorer hosted by the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA).
Includes energy sector a nd industrial process CO 2 emissions only.
Demand for oil declines from 98 million barrels per day (mb/d) in 2019 to 65 mb/d in 2030 in the NZE2050, an annual average decline of more than 3.5%.
This would represent a stepchange in the trajectory of oil demand, although this decline rate is still slower than the underlying rate of decline in supply that we would see if there were to be no investment in new or existing fields, in which case oil su pply would decline by around 8 -9% per year (IEA, 2020b) .
This means that some upstream investment in oil would still be needed even in the NZE2050 world of rapidly falling oil demand.
Nonetheless, this trajectory for oil and natural gas demand would present extraordinary difficulties for economies that rely heavily today on revenues from oil and gas.
In the SDS, it is assumed that these countries use the revenues received during energy transitions to diversify their economies and to develop new and innovative ways to utilise their hydrocarbon reserves that do not result in CO 2 emissions (e.g.
Existing fiscal and social strains in these economies from the pandemic would be compounded by the speed of falling hydrocarbon demand i n the NZE2050 , and it would be extremely challenging for them to carry out the economic reforms that would be necessary in the short time available.
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18Gt CO₂ Thousand MtoeNZE2050SDS1.5 °C scenarios high overshoot 1.5 °C scenarios low and no overshoot IEA.
132 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery 4.2.2 Electricity supply In the SDS, CO 2 emissions from the power sector decline by 5.9 Gt in the period to 2030 (from 13.7 Gt in 2019).
In the NZE2050, replacing a larger number of existing power plants with low emission technologies mean that emissions fall by an additional 2.5 Gt (there is a further 0.
2 Gt CO 2 reduction in the power sector as a result of behaviour changes) .
This means that total CO 2 emissions from the power sector fall by around 60% in the NZE2050 between 2019 and 2030.
For context, the fastest country -level reduction in CO 2 emissions from the power sector seen over a recent ten -year period was in the United Kingdom, where emissions fell by around 60% from 2008 to 2018.
The rapid reduction of emissions from electricity generation in the NZE2050 is critical because electrification based on low -emission electricity is one of the key mechanisms to reduce emissions in end -use sectors.
These emissions reductions therefore occur against the backdrop of expanding electricity demand.
Globally, electricity demand grows by around 400 terawatt- hours (TWh) each year on average to 2030, or 1.6% a year.
This is equivalent to adding the current electricity demand of India, the fourth -largest global electricity market, to the power mix every three years.
Figure 4.7 ⊳ Coal -fired electricity generation by technology in the NZE2050 There is a major reduction in coal -fired generation and related CO 2 emissions in the NZE2050, with the use of the least efficient coal power plants falling to zero by 2030 Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
The largest emissions reductions come from a very rapid decline in coal -fired generation, which falls by nearly 7 500 TWh between 2019 -30 in the NZE2050, a 75% reduction (Figure 4.7).
Most of this reduction comes from a limited number of countries – including China, India and Southeast Asia – that account for close to two -thirds of global coal consumption in power in 2020.
The application of CCUS would help to reduce emissions from existing coal -fired plants, but it would be extremely challenging to deploy CCUS at the 2 4 6 8 10 2010 2020e 2030Thousand TWh SubcriticalSupercriticalAdvancedCombined heat and powerGeneration from coal -fired plants in the SDS IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 133 4 scale needed over the next ten years.
The majority of emissions reductions from coal -fired power plants therefore comes from reducing operations and closing facilities.
Generation from low emission technologies ramps up even faster in the NZE2050 than in the SDS, and renewables therefore shoulder much of the responsibility for meeting the increase in electricity demand and rapid phase out of coal.
The largest ever single -year increase so far in global renewable electricity generation was about 440 TWh in 2018; in the NZE2050, the average annual increase is around 1 100 TWh from 2019 through to 2030.
Figure 4.8 ⊳ Global installed solar PV capacity by scenario, 2010-2030, and annual solar PV capacity additions in the NZE2050 Solar PV plays a key role in emissions reductions in the NZE2050, with major coal consumi ng economies, in particular, deploying solar PV at a pace well beyond previous records Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Solar photovoltaics (PV) have an outsized role to play.
Low cost financing has helped to make new solar PV capacity competitive with traditional power plants in most markets, and it can be built quickly.
Global manufacturing of solar panels has also proven that it can scale up rapidly, and there is currently around 160 GW of manufacturing capacity available.
Global solar PV deployment in the NZE2050 passes 300 GW in the mid -2020s and approaches 500 GW in 2030.
As well as ensuring sufficient manufacturing capacity, realising this rate of increase in the NZE2050 would require there to be no major issues over land access or the availability of critical materials (IEA, 2020c) .
Some of the largest increases of PV capacity installations are seen in China, India, Southeast Asia and United States, which are currently major consumers of coal.
All of these countries very soon surpass their re cord annual PV capacity additions, and capacity additions increase substantially to 2030 (Figure 4.8).
The installed capacity of solar PV worldwide increases in the NZE2050 by nearly 20% each year from 2019 to 2030.
1 0002 0003 0004 000 2010 2020e 2030GWGlobal solar PV capacity SDSNZE2050 STEPS (2016)(2017) (2018) 50 100 150 200GWSolar PV additions in NZE2050 Record high (year) 2025 2030United StatesChina Southeast AsiaIndia(2019) IEA.
134 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Wind power also scales up rapidly in the NZE2050.
There are high quality resources spread around the world both for onshore and offshore installations: offshore wind, for example, has the technical potential to generate 18 -times current global electricity demand (IEA, 2019b) .
As with solar PV, the NZE2050 sees countries that are at present major consumers of coal quickly ramp up wind power deployment beyond their previous records and continue expanding capacity additions each year.
Annual capacity additions of wind power in the NZE2050 grow globally from 60 GW in 2019 to 160 GW in 2025 and to 280 GW in 2030.
There is some scope to expand nuclear power faster than in the SDS, although the lo ng lead time of large -scale nuclear facilities means this is somewhat limited.
The SDS already assumes that most existing plants receive lifetime extensions in advanced economies (excluding those where retirements have been planned or extensions ruled out), and there is a near 90% increase in nuclear power generation in emerging market and developing economies.
Around 140 GW of new nuclear capacity is added in the SDS between 2019 -30; the NZE2050 sees an additional 40 GW.
These further additions are mainly in China and Russia, which have proved that they can build reactors in five to seven years.
Small modular nuclear reactors (SMRs) could offer a more streamlin ed construction process and shorter lead times, but the technology is reliant on accelerated innov ation efforts ( Box 4.2).
In the NZE2050, investment in the power sector nearly triples from $760 billion in 2019 to $2.2 trillion in 2030.
The level of investment in renewables ($1.1 trillion in 2030) is more than triple the largest level of investment in renewables historically.
Indeed, just after 2025, investment in renewables exceeds the highest ever level of investment in upstream oil and gas ($840 billion in 2014).
The investment figures in the NZE2050 factor in continued reductions in the costs of renewable electricity technologies in line with those seen for many renewable technologies in recent years.
It is however possible that the level of technol ogy deployment and concentration of activity in the sector could lead to further technology breakthroughs in the next decade, bringing faster cost reductions and thus reducing the levels of investment that would be needed.
Flexibility needs in power systems rise rapidly in the NZE2050, necessitating the use of all available sources of flexibility.
Hour -to-hour ramping requirements and other flexibility needs increase due to higher shares of variable renewables and changes in electricity demand patterns that reflect increasing numbers of electric cars and the electrification of end-use sectors.
Conventional power plants continue to provide the bulk of flexibility in most systems, although coal plant retirements increase the need for new sources of flexibilit y.
Energy storage technologies, including battery storage systems, scale up significantly in the NZE2050 to ensure the stability and security of electricity supply, so does the use of demand -side response measures.
The expansion, modernisation and digitali sation of electricity networks is essential to pool all available flexibility sources and support the rapid low -carbon transition of electricity supply in the NZE2050.
This requires a sharp increase in current levels of funding: investment in electricity n etworks reaches well over $800 billion by 2030, up from $270 billion in 2019.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 135 4 Box 4.2 ⊳ Innovation needs to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 The p ace at which the energy system is transformed in the NZE2050 places much higher demands on technology innovation than even the SDS.
For example, reducing emissions to near zero from some applications, such as low -carbon steel or cement production, would re quire the commercialisation of technologies that have not yet been built or operated at full scale in most cases .
These technologies, today at large prototype or demonstration stage, would on average need to be made available twice as fast as in the SDS (IEA, 2020 d).
Technology improvements would also be needed to ensure future costs of key lowcarbon technologies in the NZE2050 remain on the downward trajectory seen in recent years.
For example, the capital costs of installing solar PV have fallen in recent years through a combination of innovation and economies of scale, leading to a cost reduction of 20% every time the cumulative installed capacity has doubled.
If c apacity were to double more quickly, then new designs and configurations would be needed sooner to stay on the same cost reduction pathway.
It has taken 10- 30 years for the most rapidly developed new energy technologies to go from first prototype to markets.
There are reasons to believe that these timelines can be shortened (IEA, 2020d) , but to do so would require several different types of innovation.
For example:  Prototypes for digital technologies needed to help integrate higher levels of renewable elect ricity could be quickly developed and iterated if resources are focused on the critical challenges.
 Heavy industry and long -distance transport need new designs for large -scale systems as well as new fuels to become industry standards in the next decade.
Th is would need to start right after the completion of only one commercial -scale demonstration, which is not common practice.
 Entirely new approaches based on technologies such as direct air capture and storage would need to attract large amounts of externa l capital for a series of major projects to scale up the best ideas over the next decade.
Funding for research and development would need to increase sharply and new markets would need to be created in the NZE2050.
Policy design could help to address speci fic risks.
For example, by supporting the use of hydrogen across multiple sectors in a co -ordinated way, governments could boost the incentives for developing crosscutting approaches for its commercial use.
Governments could also focus technology prioriti es on local needs, seek to build on comparative national advantages , and exploit synergies between related technologies – such as the electrochemistry that underpins batteries, electrolysers and fuel cells – while pooling resources internationally to tackl e global challenges ; for example, by developing international standards for emerging new technologies .
The imperative to deploy quickly and enhance new solutions in the NZE2050 could also favour modular options, including nuclear SMRs .
136 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery 4.2.3 Industry In the SDS, energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions from the industry sector fall by 1.2 Gt over the 2019 -30 period (from 8.
6 Gt in 2019); in the NZE2050, they fall by an additional 0.9 Gt over this period.
Efficiency gains and electrification deliver most of the additional reductions in energy -related CO 2 emissions in the industry sector in the NZE2050.
But hydrogen and CCUS also make a significant contribution (IEA, 2020e ), and there is a huge increase in research and development expenditure on these technologies in the NZE2050 to support their widespread deployment.
Improvements in energy efficiency are a mainstay of the SDS, reducing the global average energy intensity of industrial activity by 25% from 2019 levels by 2030.
This is close to the full technical potential, especially in advanced economies.
As a result, the global average energy intensity of industrial activity in the NZE2050 falls by only a little more than in the SDS, declining by 30% in the 2019 -30 period.
Most of the addition al efficiency gains are concentrated in the aluminium, paper and cement sectors.
Figure 4.9 ⊳ Efficiency improvements in heavy industry and share of lowcarbon hydrogen used in ammonia and methanol production Energy intensity improvements in the NZE2050 extend beyond improvements in the SDS; low-carbon hydrogen use in industry also expands substantially Considerably more low -carbon hydrogen is mixed into the fuel supply than in the SDS, with around 45 Mtoe consumed in 2030 in the NZE2050 compared with 10 Mtoe in the SDS.
This represents less than 2% of industrial energy use in 2030, but provides an important early market for hydrogen, as does hydrogen's use as feedstock in the chemical sub -sector, where low -carbon hydrogen meets 15% of input needs for ammonia and methanol production in 2030, up from a very low base today ( Figure 4.9).
1% 2% 3%Iron and steel Cement Aluminium Paper STEPS SDS NZE2050Average annual efficiency improvement (2019 -30) 4%8%12%16% STEPS SDS NZE2050Share of low -carbon hydrogen in ammonia and methanol (2030) IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 137 4 There are also emissions reductions in light industry, mainly as a result of using heat pumps in place of fossil fuels for low -grade heat and upgrading electric motors .
Heat pumps are well suited to reducing emissions from the supply of low temperature (<100 °C) heat, which is the largest source of industrial heat demand today.
In the NZE2050, the adoption of heat pumps accelerates: together with other low -carbon heat sources, they displace an additional 80 Mtoe of fossil fuels on top of the 110 Mtoe reduction that occurs in the SDS between 2019 and 2030.
In total, electricity and low -carbon fuels provide around onequarter of heat demand in industry in 2030 in the NZE2050 ( Figure 4.10 ).
Electric motors in industry are the single largest source of electricity demand growth in the SDS.
In the NZE2050, all electric motors sold are of efficiency class IE4 or highe r standard, and this curbs demand growth: less than 1% of electric motors sold in 2019 met such standards.
5 Figure 4.10 ⊳ Use of fossil fuels for industrial process heat in 2019 and in the three scenarios in 2030 Around one -quarter of heat used in industry in the NZE2050 in 2030 comes from electricity and low -carbon fuels There is also a large reduction in industrial process CO 2 emissions in the NZE2050, and this comes mainly from the cement and chemical sub -sectors.
In the SDS, process emissions fall by around 40 Mt CO 2 between 2019 -30; in the NZE2050, they fall by around 400 Mt CO 2 to 2030.
Some of these reductions come from equipping processes with CCUS, but there are also opportunities for clinker substitution in cement manufacturing, which reduces the thermal energy and process carbon emissions associated with cement production.
5 Based on the International Electro- technical Commission's International Efficiency standards for electric motors that range from low (IE0) to super premium (IE4).
An IE5 ultra -premium efficiency standard is soon to be introduced.
20%40%60%80%100% STEPS SDS NZE2050 Fossil fuels Low-carbon fuels ElectricityProcess heat technology mix 2030 200 400 600 8001 000 2019 2030MtoeFossil fuel use for process heat Above 100°C 60°C - 100°C Below 60°CSTEPS SDS NZE2050 IEA.
138 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery 4.2.4 Transport In the SDS, total transport CO 2 emissions decline b y 1.1 Gt over the 2019- 30 period (from 8.3 Gt in 2019).
In the NZE2050, changes to road vehicle fleets and in aviation and maritime shipping mean that emissions fall by an additional 0.7 Gt over this period (there is a further 1.6 Gt CO 2 reduction in the transport sector as a result of behaviour changes).
Most of these additional emissions reductions come from changes in passenger cars, light -duty trucks, buses and two/three -wheelers.
By 2030, over 50% of passenger cars sold in the NZE2050 are electric (com pared with 4 0% in the SDS); in 2019 this figure was around 2.5%.
The number of electric passenger cars sold in the NZE2050 rises to 25 million in 2025 and more than 50 million in 2030, compared with 2 million in 2019.
There is also rapid growth in other ze ro emissions vehicles such as fuel cell vehicles ( Figure 4.11).
Figure 4.11 ⊳ Annual electric and fuel cell vehicle sales in the three scenarios More than 50 million electric cars are sold by 2030 in the NZE2050, 50% of total car sales.
Around 30% of medium - and h eavy -duty trucks sold by 2030 are electric or use hydrogen.
Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
20 40 60 80 100 120STEPS SDS NZE2050Electric Fuel-cell Internal combustion engineVehicle sales in 2030 (million vehicles) Passenger cars 2 4 6 8 10 12STEPS SDS NZE2050Medium -and heavy -duty trucks 20%40%60% 2010 2020e 2030 STEPS SDS NZE2050Electric and fuel -cell share of sales 2010 2020e 2030Passenger cars Medium -and heavy -duty trucks IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 139 4 Even though emissions are not eliminated from all countries' electricity sectors by 2030, front -loading the electrification of car sales plays an importan t role in the NZE2050.
This is both because it takes some time for changes in sales to impact the composition of the overall global car fleet and because further progress after 2030 in eliminating emissions from electricity generation will automatically co ntribute more to emissions reductions from the on -road electric fleet.
Many of the clean energy technologies that are needed to reduce emissions from aviation, shipping and heavy trucks are still in their infancy today.
Despite a huge amount of innovation and deployment of these technologies in the NZE2050, as in the SDS, there is limited potential for them to contribute meaningful levels of emissions reduction in the period to 2030.
Nevertheless, there is a major ramp up in sales of electric and fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs), and medium- and heavy -duty trucks over the next decade, with sales growing from negligible levels today to nearly 30% of the total by 2030.
Ensuring the rate of growth in EVs will require a huge step up in battery manufacturing capacity and a major increase in the capacity of supply chains to provide critical materials (IEA, 2020c) .
In recent years, global battery manufacturing capacity has doubled every three -to-four years: in the NZE2050, capacity would need to double every two years.
Hydrogen production and distribution infrastructure also ramp up substantially in the NZE2050.
The extensive use of b iofuel s that is factored into the SDS would require all regions to resolve concerns associated with the sustainability of feedstock.
Extending biofuel use further than the SDS would require a rapid scale up in advanced biofuel technologies to overcome these concerns.
The maturity of these advanced biofuel production technologies varies , and they account for only a small fraction of total biofuel production today.
They can also be relatively expensive.
For example, the production of biodiesel and hydrotreated vegetable oil from lipid feedstock involves mature technologies with an abatement cost of around $200 per tonne of CO 2 (tCO 2) (at an oil price of $45 /barrel ).
There is a need for advanced biofuel technologies to develop rapidly, alongside the rapid scaling up of hydrogen use in synthetic fuels, since they play an increasing role in the transport sector after 2030 in the NZE2050.
Just over 1.5 mb/d biofuels are used in aviation and shipping in the NZE2050 in 2030, up from negligible levels today , and 50% more than in the SDS.
Nonetheless, total bioenergy use in transport in the NZE2050 is broadly similar to the levels in the SDS.
This is because the increasing rate of growth in electrification and the use of hydrogen in passenger cars is a better way to reduce oil demand with the speed that is required in the NZE2050.
4.2.5 Buildings In the SDS, direct CO 2 emissions from the b uildings sector fall by 0.7 Gt over the 2019 -30 period (from 3 Gt in 2019).
In the NZE2050, an increase in the pace of retrofitting existing buildings beyond the level in the SDS means that direct CO 2 emissions decline by an IEA.
140 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery additiona l 0.3 Gt over this period (there is a further 0.
2 Gt reduction in the buildings sector as a result of behaviour changes).
In the NZE2050, more than 2 million homes in advanced economies would be retrofitted each month, meaning that close to half of existin g buildings in advanced economies would have been retrofitted by 2030.
Around one -third would have been retrofitted elsewhere (Figure 4.12 ).
Further efforts after 2030 would lead to the retrofitting of the entire existing global building stock well before 2050.
Figure 4.12 ⊳ Retrofit of existing floor area (left) and share of heat pumps to meet space heating energy needs (right) Retrofits are significantly accelerated and deepened in the NZE2050; heat pumps are also much more widely deployed across all regions Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020; EMDE = emerging market and developing economies.
Not only do the numbers of retrofits need to increase significantly in the NZE2050, but so do the savings achieved with each retrofit.
By 2022, essentially all retrofits are assumed to deliver sufficient improvements to bring the buildings sector in line with net -zero or near zero emissions (all new buildings meet such standards in the NZE2050).
This means the addition of top -rated insulation for ceilings, floors and walls; the installation of lowemissivity triple or double glazing; and the integration of passive heating and cooling solutions wherever possible (GlobalABC, IEA, UNEP, 2020) .
These deep energy retrofits would reduce heating energy needs by well over 50%, while also reducing cooling needs.
In the NZE2050, b ans on the sale of new fossil fuel -fired boilers are introduced very soon and there is a rapid phase out of existing fossil fuel -fired boilers.
As a result, heat pumps and electric storage water heaters meet a fast growing share of h eating needs .
In the SDS, there are around 65 million heat pumps sold in 2030; in the NZE2050, that figure rises to more than 75 million .
All new buildings in the NZE2050 also incorporate the use of smart systems to facilitat e large -scale demand -side response.
Renewable heat solutions in 25%50%75%100% 2020e 2025 2030 2020e 2025 2030 Not retrofit Retrofit in SDS Additional retrofit in NZE2050EMDERetrofit of existing floor area Advanced economies5%10%15%20% 2019 2030 SDS2030 NZE2050 Advanced economies EMDEHeat pumps IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 141 4 buildings such as solar thermal heating and biomass also play an important role in reducing emissions from heat supply , especially in regions with high levels of solar irradiation or biomass a vailability.
The use of hy drogen and other low -carbon gases in buildings expands , although this plays a relatively small role in the emissions reductions needed over the period to 2030 since infrastructure cannot ramp up fast enough for this to be a widespread solution.
Figure 4.13 ⊳ Share of most efficient available technologies in cumulative residential equipment sales, 2020-2030 The shift towards more efficient appliances is significantly accelerated in the NZE2050 to limit electricity demand growth.
Sales of more efficient air conditioners ramp up the fastest In the SDS, electricity demand in buildings in 2030 is 15 % higher than in 2019.
Some of the technologies deployed in the NZE2050 add further to this.
For example, broader electrification of heating in the buildings sector in the NZE2050 compared with the SDS adds over 220 TWh of additional electricity demand (a further two percentage points of growth over the 2019 -30 period).
The increase in electricity demand has to be kept as low as possible in the NZE2050 to ensure that new low- emission electricity capacity additions displace fossil fuel use rather than to meet growing demand.
Two k ey mechanisms that help are enhanced im provements to appliance efficiency , and the use of passive cooling solutions and improvements to building envelopes to reduc e cooling needs.
Improving the efficiency of appliances requires an accelerated ramp up of sales of the most efficient technologies, such as light -emitting diodes (LEDs) for lighting, and air conditioners and refrigerators with vacuum insulated panels ( Figure 4.13 ).
As a result of these increases, electricity demand for residential appliances, lighting and space cooling is 7% lower in 2030 in the NZE2050 than in the SDS.
20%40%60%80%100% Refrigeration Cleaning TVs and PCs Cooling LightingSTEPS SDS NZE2050 IEA.
142 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery 4.3 Role of behaviour changes in the NZE2050 The energy future portrayed in both the NZE2050 and the SDS depends on the behaviour of people .
Their decisions – to purchase an electric car, to insulate a home, to cook using LPG rather than wood – can be guided by policy and regulations, and influenced by markets, but are in many cases u ltimately a matter of personal choice.
Without structural changes in the way energy is produced and consumed, the emissions reductions seen in 2020 will be short -lived and will soon start to rise again.
In the SDS, energy -related activity recover s to pre -Covid -19 levels in most sectors by 2022, and continue s to rise steadily through to 2030.
For example, demand for passenger aviation is around 150% higher in 2030 than in 2020, and road freight activity is up by around a half (Figure 4.14).
The behaviour changes assumed in the SDS include a shift towards more recycling and increased use of public transport.
However, these changes are deliberately limited in both scale and scope, because a chief purpose of the SDS is to describe a set of structural changes to the energy system that can, by themselves, bring about the transitions needed to meet UN Sustainable Development Goals related to energy.
Behaviour changes account for around 9% of the difference in CO 2 emissions between the STEPS and the SDS in 2030.
Figu re 4.14 ⊳ Global growth in selected energy-related activities in the Sustainable Development Scenario, 2019-2030 Projected demand for major energy- related activities recovers from the Covid -19 crisis over the period to 2022 and sees sustained growth to 2030 Note: households = number of households; residential floor space = floor area per square metre; road freight = tonne kilometres; passenger cars = passenger kilometres; passenger aviation = revenue passenger kilometres.
Behaviour changes in the NZE2050 are far more wide -ranging than those in the SDS.
The 6.6 Gt difference in CO 2 emissions between the SDS and NZE2050 in 2030 would be very hard to achieve entirely through structural changes in the energy sector alone, especially if 60 80 100 120 140 160 2019 2025 2030Index (2019 = 100)Passenger aviation Road freight Residential floor space Passenger cars Households IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achievin g net -zero emissions by 2050 143 4 demand for energy services rises in line with expected economic and population growth.
Behaviour changes are therefore essential to achi eve the pace and scale of emissions reductions in the NZE2050, and they account for around 30% of the difference in emissions between the SDS and NZE2050 in 2030.
Realising the behaviour changes included in the NZE2050 would require concerted efforts by go vernments and active participation of people.
We estimate that around 60% of the emissions reductions from behaviour changes could be influenced or mandated by governments.
6 The details of the measures introduced and the way they are handled would be important: some measures to encourage behaviour changes might be unpopular unless handled in a transparent manner and perceived as being fair and just.
It is evident in any case that not everyone will be able or willing to implement all of the behaviour changes included in the NZE2050 all of the time.
Cultural preferences, affordability and personal welfare would all play a part in determining where, and to what extent, they could be implemented.
The measures included in the NZE2050 are therefore only an illustr ation of the types and magnitude of behaviour changes that would be necessary to achieve the overall level of emissions reductions.
Although the behaviour changes in the NZE2050 would have some effect on many aspects of daily life, for the most part they would involve an incremental modification to an activity, such as driving more slowly or adjusting the temperature setting in a home.
Only in the case of long -haul flying would these changes involve curtailing activity, and here continued improvements in video conferencing might be able to provide a useful substitute.
The response to Covid -19 across the world, during which sweeping and rapid behaviour changes were brought about by governments, suggest that many people might be willing to make some energy -related behaviour changes to help mitigate a global crisis if they see a case for doing so.
This section first sets out the 11 specific behaviour changes that are incorporated in the NZE2050, and gives details of their impact on CO 2 emissions in the NZE2050 to 2030.
It then analyses each of these behaviour changes in more detail, showing the level of CO 2 emissions which originate from different activities, such as taking a long -haul flight or commuting to work.
4.3.1 CO 2 emissions savings from behaviour changes in the NZE2050 The NZE2050 assumes, in the absence of behaviour changes, that activity growth would be similar to that in the SDS.
The NZE2050 introduces some of the more technically straightforward behaviour changes in the near term, and these quickly save a round 1.4 Gt CO 2.
Other more challenging changes ramp up more slowly over time, leading to a total saving of 2 Gt CO 2 in 2030 ( Table 4.1 and Figure 4.15 ).
6 A number of governments are taking steps to introduce measures that will impact energy- related activity.
For example, Japan recently recommended setting limits to cooling in order to avoid excessive energy usage (Kyodo News, 2019).
Legislation to limit urban car use to improve air quality has been introduced in many cities.
In the United Kingdom, there are trials to look at the effects on air pollution of reducing speed limits by 16 km/h in certain regions (Highways England, 2020).
All rights reserved.144 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Table 4.1 ⊳ Behaviour change measures and impact on CO 2 emissions in the NZE2050 to 2030 Behaviour change Emissions savings (Mt CO 2) Cumulative savings (Mt CO 2) Share in 2030 2021 2025 2030 2021- 30 Space heating Reduce space heating temperature by 3 °C.
460 33% 400 23% 300 15% 4 340 23% 11% of residential emissions.
Space cooling Raise air conditioning temperature by 3 °C.
95 7% 95 5% 45 2% 860 5% 2% of residential emissions.
Line -drying Line-drying instead of tumble -drying during summer months.
65 5% 55 3% 30 1% 550 3% 1% of residential emissions.
Laundry temperature Wash on average 10 °C colder.
30 2% 25 1% 15 1% 270 1% 1% of residential emissions.
Driving more slowly Reduce driving speed by 7 km/h.
420 30% 400 23% 340 17% 4 280 23% 7% of road transport emissions.
Eco-driving Avoid sudden acceleration, stops or idling; early upshifting.
30 2% 160 9% 290 14% 1 670 9% 6% of road transport emissions.
Ride -sharing Share all urban car trips.
20 2% 100 6% 190 10% 1 100 6% 9% of passenger car emissions.
Cycling and walking Cycle or walk all car trips that would take less than ten minutes to cycle.
15 1% 75 4% 140 7% 820 4% 7% of passenger car emissions.
Mobile air conditioning Raise air conditioning temperature in cars by 3 °C.
120 9% 110 6% 90 4% 1 160 6% 4% of passenger car emissions.
Working from home 20% of global workforce works from home 3 days of the week.7 80 6% 75 4% 55 3% 800 4% 3% of passenger car emissions.
Passenger aviation Total passenger aviation.
50 4% 260 15% 520 26% 2 850 15% 60% of aviation emissions.
Re place all flights less than 1 hour.
10 50 100 550 11% of aviation emissions.
Replace three-q uarters of all business flights.
25 120 240 1 340 28 % of aviation emissions.
Replace three-q uarters of long-haul flights.
35 170 350 1 910 40% of aviation emissions.
Total 1 390 1 750 2 010 18 700 Notes: Business flights = trips for work purposes.
A 50% adoption rate is assumed for eco- driving.
Doublecounting emissions savings is avoided by taking into account the collective effects of more frequent cycling/walking, more frequent sharing of urban car trips and eco- friendly driving habits occurring simultaneously; similarly, double counting of aviation measures is avoided in total CO 2 savings.
7 A maximum of 20% of jobs globally can be done at home (IEA, 2020f).
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 145 4 Figure 4.15 ⊳ Impact of behaviour changes on CO 2 emissions in the NZE2050 Some changes in behaviour could happen right away; others would need to be guided by policy, supported by infrastructure, and would ramp up over time Note: Emissions reductions take into account the wider changes in the energy sector in the NZE2050, and so some behaviour changes have a smaller impact on emissions in 2030 than i n 2021.
Just over half of the emissions savings from behaviour changes in the NZE2050 in 2030 are associated with road transport; for example, reducing average road traffic speeds by 7 kilometres per hour (km/h), and walking or cycling instead of using a car for trips that would take less than ten minutes to cycle.
One -quarter of the emissions savings from behaviour changes are from reduced passenger aviation; for instance, phasing out flights of less than 1 hour, and reducing long -haul flights and fligh ts for business purposes by threequarters.
This would reduce the number of flights annually by around 45% in 2030 and emissions from aviation by 60% , although , even with this reduction, total passenger aviation activity in 2030 would be similar to the level in 2017.
A final fifth of emissions savings come from behaviour changes at home; for example, turning down space heating temperature settings by 3 °C in the winter and reducing cooling in summer months by 3 °C.
The scope and scale of the measures in Table 4.1 illustrates some examples of the emissions savings in the NZE2050 that would be made if the behaviour changes were to be adopted everywhere.
In practi ce, behaviour changes would inevitably happen to varying degrees: some people might sometimes choose to forgo a long -distance holiday or work from home a few days each week; others might choose to cycle shorter trips only when the weather is fine.
There are many alternative ways in which these measures could combine to lead to similar reductions in CO 2 emissions to those assumed in the NZE2050: for example, driving speeds might be reduced by more the 7 km/h in some regions but less than this in others , depending on local circumstances.
Some of the behaviour changes in the NZE2050 would build gradually over time.
While there are no barriers to turning down the thermostat or driving more slowly today, a move towards more widespread ride -sharing, for example, would probably take place gradually in -2 000-1 500-1 000- 5002021 2025 2030Mt CO₂Space heating Space cooling Line-drying Laundry temperature Slower driving Eco-driving Ride-sharing Cycling/walking Mobile air conditioning Working from home Passenger aviationResidential Road transport Aviation IEA.
146 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery tandem with expansion of the ride -share market.
Other types of behaviour change would benefit from infrastructure, such as cycle lanes, that would be built over time.
Some of these behaviour changes could also have indirect consequences elsewhere in the energy system, some of which might affect overall net emissions reductions.
For example, fewer flights would mean less demand for new aircraft, and that in turn would mean less demand for aluminium.
This might reduce emissions in industry.
However if airlines were to be reluctant to invest in new planes as a result of lower demand, that could be a barrier to efficiency improvements, and make it harder to reduce emissions.
Likewise, more working from home could entic e people to move farther from their places of work, meaning fewer but longer commutes, with unclear consequences for emissions.
There are also behaviour changes not directly related to the energy sector that could have a large impact on GHG emissions, and in particular on emissions of non-CO 2 greenhouse gases.
A shift towards vegetarian diets, different agricultural practices and improved treatment of waste, for example, are often implied by 1.5 °C scenarios assessed by the IPCC, as without these changes it is very difficult to achieve rapid emissions reductions, especially in non -CO 2 greenhouse gases (Box 4.1).
4.3.2 Further details on behaviour changes Private mobility In the SDS, passenger car activity (measured in passenger -kilometres) increases by around a quarter between 2019 and 2030 as a result of economic and population growth, and increase d car ownership.
However, CO 2 emissions from passenger cars fall by nearly a quarter over this period.
This is because there is a dramatic rise in sales of electric car s, while at the same time the average e fficiency of new cars sold increases by more than 5 % per year .
As a result, the global average CO 2 emissions associated with driving one kilometre in a passenger car in 2030 is almost 40% lower than in 2019.
The SDS sees some reductions in car activity as a result of shifts towards public transport, and passenger car activity globally is around 4% lower than in the STEPS by 2030 as a result.
However there is scope for much larger behaviour changes, and we estimate tha t together these could save up to 1.1 Gt CO 2 in 2030 in addition to the emissions reductions in the SDS.
Replacing short car journeys with walking, cycling and public transport.
The frequency and length of different car journeys varies considerably by country, but on average people make a much larger number of local trips than long -distance trips (Figure 4.16 ).
We estimate that 60% of car jour neys worldwide are less than 10 km, whereas around 5% are greater than 50 km (US Office for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, 2018; Wang, 2015; UK Government, 2019a ).
This means that around a third of CO 2 emissions from passenger cars globally come f rom trips that are under 20 km, and around 10% from trips that would take less than about 1 5 minutes to cycle .
Globally, if half of all car trips of less than 5 km were to be undertaken by bicycle, or by an alternative low -carbon method of IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 147 4 transport, this would save over 130 Mt CO 2 today.
In the NZE2050 in 2030, all car trips shorter than 3 km (i.e.
those that would take less than about ten minutes to cycle) are replaced by alternative low -carbon methods, saving around 140 Mt CO 2.
These modal shifts could be supported by improved urban infrastructure such as widened pavements, car -free zones or cycle schemes.
Figure 4.16 ⊳ Global frequency distribution of car trips by length and corresponding cumulative CO 2 emissions Around 7% of CO 2 emissions from cars are from trips which could be cycled in less than ten minutes Eco-driving practices – such as moderating acceleration, early upshifting through gears, anticipating traffic flow and signals to avoid sudden starts and stops, and gradual and even deceleration – could lead to a huge reduction in fuel consumption for longer car journeys and for trucks.
Studies have found that these driving practices can improve fuel economy by up to a third in test conditions; when applied imperfectly and in real traffic, the average improvement in fuel consumption is likely to be in the range of 8 -19% (Jeffreys, Graves and Roth, 2018; Jones and Kammen , 2011).
Based on these real -world estimates, we estimate that, if adopted by half of drivers globally, eco- driving would reduce emissions today b y more than 330 Mt CO 2.
Driving more slowly can also have a large impact on fuel economy.
Several studies have assessed the imp act of reducing speed limits on high speed roads as well as in cities.
Maximum steady speed fuel econ omy is generally achieved by driving in the highest gear at the lowest practical speed , which corresponds to around 65 -80 km/h for most vehicles (Thomas et al., 2013).
The relationship between speed reductions and fuel consumption is affected by driving speed,8 but many studies identify a 7 -18% reduction in fuel 8 For example, driving at 50 km/h instead of 60 km/h would in most circumstances lead to a larger reduction in fuel use than driving at 20 km/h instead of 30 km/h.
20%40%60% < 10 km 10-20 km 20-30 km 30-40 km 40-50 km > 50 kmDistribution of car trips by distance 15 30 45 60 5 10 15 20 0% 20% 40% Minuteskm Share of passenger car emissionsTrip distance, emissions and cycle time IEA.
148 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery consumption for a 10 km/h reduction in speed (IEA, 2018; Thomas, 2013; European Environment Agenc y, 2019).
If there were to be an average 7 km/h reduction in speed for all road traffic, this would reduce emissions today by about 4 00 Mt CO 2.
Mobile air conditioning (MAC) in road vehicles consume s almost 2 mb/d (IEA, 2019c) .
The proportion of annual vehicle fuel consumption used by MAC varies by country, ranging between 3% in colder clima tes and 20% in hotter climates, but on average makes up nearly 9% of annual vehicle fuel consumption globally (IEA, 2019c; ICCT, 2019) .
Demand for MAC is set to rise by 2030, as almost all new vehicles sold by then will have MAC as standard equipment, and global warming is likely to cause a further increase in MAC demand of around 3% by 2030 compared to 2020.
However, it has been found that a 4 °C increase in the targe t temperature inside a vehicle can reduce the energy demand of MAC by over 20% (Subiantoro, Ooi and Stimming, 2014; US Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, 2017).
We estimate that if car drivers were to turn up the air conditioning by 3 °C, th is would reduce emissions from cars by almost 4%, or 90 Mt CO 2 in the NZE2050 in 2030.
Ride -sharing, in which people with similar destinations share a vehicle for part or all of their trip, has a huge potential to reduce emissions.
It is thought to work be st in urban settings where trips are more likely to overlap, and where public transport would make completing a trip easier.
Studies of ride -sharing in urban areas using mob ility data have shown that matching two ride -share passengers can reduce vehicle- kilometres by 10 -40% (Jalali et al., 2017; Alexander & Gonzales, 2015; Goel et al ., 2017).
During the Covid pandemic, people might be reluctant to share rides for health reasons.
However, in the future, we estimate that, if half of all urban trips were to be shared, this could save nearly 100 Mt CO 2 in 2030.
If a higher proportion of trips were to be shared, as well as some semiurban or longer rural trips, CO 2 emission savings would be significantly higher.
Residential energy use The residential sector was responsible for around 17% of global CO 2 emissions in 2019.
There are a number of factors that shape overall energy use in buildings, including floor area, number of appliances, and the need for heating and cooling.
This means that residential e nergy consumption shows considerable variation between regions.
I n regions where space heating is required, it is typically responsible for over half of total emissions from buildings, and the per capita CO 2 emissions from residential energy consumption ar e over three -times higher than in more temperate regions.
In the SDS, total worldwide residential floor space increases by around a quarter over the period to 2030.
Despite this growth, CO 2 emissions from residential energy use fall between 2019 and 2030 , largely as a result of efficiency gains and the increasing electrification of space heating.
If implemented in full, t he related behaviour changes discussed could reduce residential CO 2 emissions by a further 380 Mt in 2030 .
Lowering indoor air temperature settings could have a material impact on emissions.
A number of studies have found that lowering the heating temperature by 1 °C can reduce energy demand for space heating by 6 -9% (Verbraucherzentrale Hamburg, 2018; Faber et IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 149 4 al., 2012; Cao and Deng, 2018) .
Based on today's building stock and energy mix, if all buildings were to reduce their indoor temperatures by 3 °C, this would save over 450 Mt CO 2 per year globally.
In the NZE2050, the potential emissions savings would fal l over time as heating becomes more efficient and less emissions intensive, but would still amount to around 300 Mt per year in 2030 ( Figure 4.17 ).
Figu re 4.17 ⊳ Impact on CO 2 emissions from reducing space heating temperature settings by 3 °C in the NZE2050 Reducing thermostat settings by 3 °C would save over 450 Mt CO 2 per year in 2020; savings fall over time as the emissions intensity of space heating decreases Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Moderating the use of air conditioning could also help reduce emissions.
The potential savings again var y by geography.
In the United States and Australia, a 1 °C increase in the target room temperature when air conditioning is being used would reduce the emissions associated with space cooling by 8 -11% on average (Australian Government, 2020; Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 2013) .
However, in many emerging economies, fan cooling is still much more common than air conditioning , and the average emissions reductions accompanying a 1 °C increase in room temperature would be smaller (Indian Bureau of Energy Efficiency, 2018).
We estimate that global emissions associated with cooling demand today would decrease by around 7% for each 1 °C increase in target temperature, which translates i nto a n annual saving of more than 30 Mt CO 2.
By 2030 in the NZE2050, a 3 °C increase would save around 45 Mt CO 2.
Line -drying could reduce household CO 2 emissions.
On average, around 8% of global energy consumption for domestic appliances is currently used for drying clothes.
If linedrying were to replace half of this demand (for drying during the six sunniest months of the year) then this would save around 70 Mt CO 2 in 2020, falling over time to 30 Mt CO 2 in 2030 in the NZE2050 as the energy intensity of electricity -powered dryers reduces.
-500-400-300-200-1002020e 2025 2030Mt CO₂North AmericaEuropeRussiaChinaRest of world IEA.
150 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Cool washing is technically a relatively straightforward behaviour changes to make.
Studies have found that washing clothes at 30 °C instead of 40 °C (the temperature most commonly used) would reduce energy consumption by around one -third, with similar savings for any other 10 °C reduction (e.g.
from 60 °C to 50 °C) (West, 2020; Shahmoham madi et al.
, 2018; Pakula and Stamminger , 2015) .
Higher wash temperatures may often still be necessary at present for sterilisation purposes because of Covid -19.
However, if this 10 °C reduction were to become possible again in the future, then in the NZE2050 in 2030, t his would save around 15 Mt CO 2, just under 2% of the emissions produced by household appliances.
Working from home The changes in CO 2 emissions from working at home depends on the trade -off between emissions reductions from avoiding a journey to and from work and the possible emissions increases from domestic energy needs at home during the working day, if these more than offset a reduction in workplace emissions.
Impacts therefore vary by region, according to the average commute length, mod e of commute transport, and the increase in residential energy use (IEA, 2020f).
This means there is significant seasonal variation in the change in CO 2 emissions.
For example, mobile air conditioning can increase energy consumption for car commutes by 5 -15% in the summer, and extra demand for space heating during the working day means that residential emissions can be up to three times larger in winter than in summer.
Figure 4.18 ⊳ Change in annual global energy consumption and CO 2 emissions from one day of home working per week A day per week working from home would reduce CO 2 emissions for a household with a car commute, but increase emissions if public or active transport is used to commute Note s: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Usi ng global fleet average efficiency and including indirect emissions from EVs.
Global average one- way commute length = 12 km.
Othe r = heat, modern biomass and other renewables.
-30-20-10010 - 12- 8- 40 4 2020e 2030 STEPS 2030 NZE2050MtoeFossil fuels Electricity Other Oil Electricity Net CO₂ (right axis)Residential Personal transport Mt CO2 IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 151 4 On average globally, we estimate that f or people who commute by car, working from home is likely to reduce overall CO 2 emissions if their journey to work is more than about 6 km.
For short car commutes or thos e that are done by public transport, working from home could increase CO 2 emissions as a result of an increase in residential energy consumption.
On average, however, for people who commute by car, the reduction in emissions from commuting is more than three -times larger than the increase in residential emissions.
By 2030, the potential for emissions savings is smaller in both the STEPS and the NZE2050 as the emissions intensity of both cars and homes reduces (Figure 4.18 ).
Around one -fifth of all jobs globally today could potentially be carried out from home.
This varies significantly by region: for example in India about 13% of jobs could be don e at home compared to 34% in Russia or over 45% in the wealthiest European countries.
Taking into account differences in the types of vehicles used for commuting across different regions, we estimate that if everyone able to do so were to work one extra day at home per week, this would save around 25 Mt CO 2 globally in 2020.9 By 2030, given changes in the energy mix, if everyone who was able to do so were to work one extra day at home per week, this would save about 18 Mt CO 2 globally.
Passenger aviation The demand for domestic and international passenger aviation increases by around 55% between 2019 and 2030 in the SDS.10 This growth is dominated by increases in Asia, which accounts for around 35% of aviation activity today, and half of the total growth in d emand to 2030.
Despite this increase in demand, global CO 2 emissions from aviation in the SDS are over 10% smaller in 2030 compared to 2019: although there are limited technology options available to reduce emissions from aviation, efficiency measures and the use of biofuels more than curtail a rise in CO 2 emissions.
We estimate that targeted behaviour changes could reduce emissions from flying by around 60% in the NZE2050 in 2030.
Historically, the rate of growth in the demand for aviation has been around double the rate of GDP growth, this correlation has been very consistent, only breaking down during the three -year period after the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, and again after the financial crisis in 2008.
However, aviation ha s been hit hard by Covid -19 – demand will be around 40% lower in 2020 than in 2019 – and the future recovery might follow a different path.
For example, there could be a long -term reduction in travel for business purposes in favour of virtual meetings (see Chapter s 5 and 8).
In 2018, there were 37 million commercial passenger flights carrying over 4 billion passengers.
Just under half of these flights were for leisure purposes, while visits to family and friends and business meetings each accounted for around one -quarter of flights 9 This assumes that there is no change in energy demand in office buildings, as is likely if home working were still to be relatively infrequent.
10 Aviation demand is given in revenue passenger kilometres (RPK), a metric of airline traffic equal to the number of kilometres travelled by revenue paying passengers.
152 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery (Figure 4.19 ).
Long-haul flights (lasting more than six hours) burn on average around 35-times more fuel than regional flight s (less than one hour), not only because they last longer, but also because they involve larger aircraft and carry a much larger weight in fuel.
As a result, while only 4% of flights are long -haul flights, they are responsible for over a third of total fuel use in the sector.
Figure 4.19 ⊳ CO 2 emissions from passenger aviation by flight duration and trip purpose in 2018 and in the NZE2050 in 2030 While less than 4% of flights are longer than six hours, they accounted for over a third of total CO 2 emissions from passenger aviation in 2018 Notes: t CO 2 = tonnes of carbon dioxide.
Visits = trips to visit friends and family; business = trips for work purposes; leisure = trips for leisure purposes.
Average speeds vary by flight distance and range from 680-750 km/h based on .
If businesses were to reassess their travel policies and make more use of video conferencing, especially as a substitute for long -haul trips, this could have a material impact on oil demand for jet fuel as well as on emissions.
Based on current aircraft efficiencies, a halving of business trips to destinations further than six hours flight would be likely to reduce the annual number of flights by less than 1 %, but w ould save around 50 Mt CO 2.
4.4 Lessons f rom countries with zero emissions targets An increasing number of countries and jurisdictions have announced targets or goals to achieve net -zero CO 2 or GHG emissions by 2050; both the NZE2050 and the SDS incorporate the achievement of these goals in full.
This section provides an overview of the status of these targets and explores how some of these countries and jurisdictions intend to achieve these targets, including how they are achieved in the SDS in the European Union.
We also provide some insights an d lessons for other policy makers and industries looking to develop targets or pathways towards net- zero emissions by 2050.
15 0 16 19 4 4 2 1 50 100 150 200 250 100 200 300 400 500 2018 2030 2018 2030 2018 2030 2018 2030 t CO₂Mt CO₂ Visits Business Leisure CO₂ per flight (right axis)Million flights Less than 1 hour 1 to 3 hours 3 to 6 hours More than 6 hours IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 153 4 By the end of August 2020, over 125 countries (including the European Union ) had set or were actively considering long -term net -zero emissions targets (Figure 4.20).
Many companies and investor groups have also pledged to reduce their emissions to net -zero.
These targets vary in timescale and scope.
While most countries have set a target to achieve net -zero emissions by 2050, some have set an earlier date.
Uruguay, for example, aims to achieve net -zero emissions by 2030, and Finland by 2035.
Some countries include all GHG emissions in their targets while others only include a subset of GHG emissions (e.g.
New Zealand, for example, targets net -zero emissions from CO 2 and nitrous dioxide by 2050, along with a significant reduction in methane from agriculture and waste.
Figure 4.20 ⊳ Announced net-zero CO 2 or GHG emissions by 2050 reduction targets More than a dozen countries and the European Union, which accounted for around 10% of global CO 2 emissions in 2019, have net -zero emissions targets in law or proposed legislation Notes: In law = a net-zero target has been approved by parliament and is legally binding.
In policy document = a net -zero target has been proposed but does not have legally binding status.
Proposed legislation = a netzero target has been proposed to parliament to be voted into law; Under discussion = countries that have signalled an intent to put forward net -zero targets (UNFCCC, 2019) , e.g.
as part of the Climate Ambition Alliance or the Carbon Neutrality Coalition.
Fiji, which accounts for less than 0.01% of global CO 2 emissions, has a target in proposed legislation which is not shown.
The Marshall Islands, Iceland and Liberia, which each account for less than 0.01% of global CO 2 emissions, have targets in policy documents which are not shown.
Existing net -zero emissions targets play a key role in the SDS in accelerating action on reducing emissions elsewhere around the world.
They help to stimulate innovation and develop regulations and markets for low emission products and services.
The United Kingdom was one of the first countries to legislate for net -zero GHG emissions, and its Committee on Climate Change has developed detailed plans for how this could be achieved (Spotlight).
0.01%0.10%1.00%10.00% Mexico Korea Other Uruguay Cyprus Latvia Costa Rica Slovakia Switzerland Finland Portugal Austria Ukraine South Africa Canada Luxembourg Slovenia Ireland Chile Spain European Union Norway Denmark New Zealand Sweden Hungary France United Kingdom GermanyUnder discussion In policy document Proposed legislation In lawShare of global energy -related CO2emissions Increasing legal status IEA.
154 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery How can the United Kingdom reach net -zero GHG emissions by 2050?
In 2019 , the United Kingdom was the first major economy to pass into law a commitment to reach net- zero GHG emissions by 2050.
T he United Kingdom was responsible for around 1% of global GHG emissions in 2019.
The objective to reach net -zero GHG emissions by 2050 – a target that includes all sources of CO 2 and non -CO 2 GHG emissions11 – builds on rapid reductions in CO 2 emissions that have occurred in the United Kingdom in recent years.
Between 2008 and 2018 , total CO 2 emissions fell by around 30%, a reduction of around 1 5 Mt CO 2 per year on average.
This rate of emissions reduction is slightly higher than the rate that would be needed over the next 30 years to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050 .
The UK's Committee on Climate Change (CCC ) published a detailed roadmap on how the 2050 target could be achieved in its "Further Ambition" scenario (CCC, 2019).
Most of the recent emissions reductions have come from the power sector.
I n 2008 , for example, coal provided around one -third of UK electricity generation while renewables provided around 6%; in 2018, their shares of generation were almost reversed (Figure 4.21 ).
Despite this progress, electricity generation was still responsible for around one-fifth of the UK's energy sector CO 2 emissions i n 2018.
Continued rapid emissions reductions in the electricity sector form a central component of both shortterm national targets and the CCC scenario for net -zero emissions in 2050.
The UK government recently committed to phase out c oal-fired plants by 2024 (UK Government, 2020) .
It estimates that renewables will account for m ore than half of total electricity generation by 2030 ( UK Government, 2019b).
By 2050 , the CCC scenario projects that more than 80% of electricity will be generated by renewables or natural gas fitted with CCUS .
The use of BECCS removes a further 50 Mt CO 2 from the atmosphere, making the electricity sector net negative in terms of CO 2 emissions.
Between 2008 and 2018, CO 2 emissions from residential buildings in the United Kingdom fell around 15%, while those from transport (excluding international aviation and shipping ) were broadly constant .
Given the slow turnover of capital stock, eliminating emissions in these sectors by 2050 will require action long before then.
Based on its Further Ambition scenario, the CCC recommends that newly built houses should not be connected to natural gas networks beyond 2025 and that all new cars and vans sold after 2035 should be zero emissions vehicles.
It also recommends that the charging infrastructure to support EVs should increase more than ten -fold from 2019 levels in the next 3 0 years.
11 The UK's net -zero emissions target currently excludes emissions from international ship ping and aviation in its sovereign territory; however the Further A mbition scenario includes these emissions in its overall emissions reductions.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 155 4 The Further Ambition scenario includes a role for low -carbon hydrogen to reduce emissions across a number of end- use sectors.
For example, existing gas networks are repurposed to carry hydrogen for use in modified domestic boilers to pro vide heat in buildings .
Hydrogen is also used to reduce emissions from trucks and provide clean high temperature heat in industry.
The hydrogen is produced from a variety of sources, including from natural gas facilities equipped with CCUS .
The United King dom benefits from having large CO 2 storage potential , and much of the infrastructure that would be needed to transport the CO 2 to storage site s is already in place .
The Further Ambition scenario also highlights the importance of changes in consumer behavio ur in achieving emissions reductions.
Around 10% of the overall GHG reductions to 2050 in the scenario are directly associated with behaviour changes and wider societal change.
These are especially important in some hard -to-abate sectors, such as aviation and to address non -CO 2 emissions such as methane.
For example, the scenario includes a 20% reduction in beef, lamb and dairy consumption in 2050 from 2019 levels.
In addition, the CCC indicates that around 50% of the economy -wide GHG reductions that occur between 2019 and 2050 would rely on measures that combine low -carbon technologies with societal and behaviour changes, such as consumers choosing to buy EVs or to insulate their homes.
Figure 4.21 ⊳ Electricity generation in the United Kingdom historically and in the CCC's "Further Ambition" scenario in 2050 Between 2008 and 2018, the shares of electricity generation from coal and renewables were reversed.
By 2050, the CCC projects renewables supplying 60% of electricity Notes: CCC = Committee on Climate Change.
Data for 2050 are based on the CCC's Further A mbition scenario.
20%40%60%80%100% 2008 2018 2050Other Natural gas with CCUS BECCS Renewables Nuclear Natural gas Coal IEA.
156 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery 4.4.1 Net-zero emissions in the European Union in the SDS The European Parliament and the European Council have endorsed a target to achieve netzero GHG emissions in the European Union (EU) by 2050.
This target is a central component of the proposed " European Green Dea l", and the €750 billion ($850 billion) recovery package agreed by EU heads of state and governments in July 2020 to boost the recovery from the Covid -19 pandemic aims for spending to be in line with the net-zero GHG objective.
The newly proposed EU Hydrogen Strategy is also motivated by the need to reach net -zero emissions by 2050.
The SDS fully incorporates these proposals, and the energy sector transformation of the European Union in the SDS provides a numbe r of insights into how a large region can achieve net -zero emissions by 2050.
In the most recent net -zero GHG emissions economy -wide pathways constructed by the European Commission, energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions are around 93% lower than 1990 levels in 2050, with remaining emissions eliminated through the use of CO 2 removal technologies and processes (European Commission, 2018) .
This vision for the EU energy sector is in line with the SDS, in which energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions (including CO 2 emissions from international aviation and shipping) are 92% lower than 1990 levels in 2050.
In the SDS, CO 2 emissions in the European Union fall by around 110 Mt CO 2 on average each year between 2019 and 2030, and by around 60 Mt CO 2 over the 2030 -50 period.
In the power sector, virtually all unabated coal generation is phased out by 2030 in the SDS.
The EU average emissi ons intensity of electricity generation in the SDS drops from 240 grammes of CO 2 per kilowatt -hour (g CO 2/kWh) in 2019 to around 60 g CO 2/kWh in 2030 and to less than 10 g CO 2/kWh by 2045.
Figure 4.22 ⊳ Electricity generation by source in the European Union in the Sustainable Development Scenario, 2019-2050 Virtually all unabated coal is phased out of the EU electricity mix by 2030 and more than 80% of EU electricity comes from renewables in 2050 1 5003 0004 500 2019 2030 2050 2019 2030 2050TWhCCUS BECCS Other renewables Solar PV Wind offshore Wind onshore Hydro Bioenergy Nuclear Oil Gas CoalUnabated fossil fuels Low -emission technologies IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 157 4 Renewables account for 75% of new power generation capacity additions to 2050, with wind and solar PV leading the way ( Figure 4.22 ).
There is more than 50 GW of renewables capacity added each year on average between 2019 and 2050, more than double the level added annually over the last five years.
By 2050, offshore wind is the single largest source of electricity, providing over a quarter of electricity supply, followed by onshore wind, nuclear power and solar PV.
The share of variable renewable electricity in 2050 is 60%.
There are grid infrastructure upgrades together with flexibility options, including some 190 GW of battery storage: these help to enhance energy security, reduce consumer bills and promote a better allocation of resources.
The existing fleet of gas -fired power plants in the European Union plays a part in enhancing flexibility as well, though they are only operated for short periods.
BECCS absorbs around 25 Mt CO 2 in 2050 and offsets the remaining unabated emissions from the gas -fired power fleet.
Figure 4.23 ⊳ Evolution of selected end-use technologies in the European Union in the Sustainable Development Scenario, 2050 In the SDS, virtually all passenger cars in the European Union are electric by 2050, all buildings have been retrofitted, and there are high levels of hydrogen and biomethane use Note: EV = electric vehicles; kWh/m2 = kilowatt- hour per square metre.
Electrification with low -emission electricity plays a central role in reducing emissions from end-use sectors as the share of electricity in total final energy consumption more than doubles from 21% in 2019 to 45% in 2050.
Electric passenger car sales rise from around 2% of the market in 2019 to more than 50% in 2030 and virtually all sales in 2050 ( Figure 4.23 ).
This shift towards electro -mobility is also seen in light trucks, urban buses and motorbikes.
It affects heavy trucks to some extent as well.
Around half of EU road freight involves journeys of no more than 200 -300 km, for which EVs are a competitive option.
By 2050, around 40% of medium - and heavy -duty trucks are electric in the SDS.
50% 100% 2019 2030 2050EV share of car sales 80 160 2019 2030 2050Residential energy intensity (kWh/m2) Low carbon Fossil fuels 50 100 2019 2030 2050Low -carbon gases (Mtoe) Hydrogen Biogas and biomethane IEA.
158 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery Energy efficiency contributes one quarter of the cumulative emissions savings relative to the STEPS over the period to 2050.
Around 50% of the EU residential building stock in 2050 exists today, which means that insulation and retrofitting are critical to reduce energy demand for heating.
There is EU legislation requiring all member states to establish renovatio n strategies to eliminate emissions from their national building stock by 2050 and stipulating that all new buildings must be "nearly zero -energy buildings".
This is achieved in full in the SDS, with around 2.5% of buildings retrofitted each year to 2025, rising to 4% per year thereafter.
The deployment of much more efficient appliances within buildings also helps to reduce energy use substantially.
By 2050, emissions from the buildings sector are 96% lower than in 2019.
Natural gas demand falls by nearly 80% between 2019 and 2050, and this inevitably creates uncertainty over the long -term future of European gas infrastructure, which is likely to depend on its ability to accommodate low -carbon gases.
In the SDS, low -carbon gases such as biomethane and hydrogen account for more than half of total gas demand by 2050.
Low-carbon fuels are important to cut CO 2 emissions in hard -to-electrify sectors: hydrogen fuel cell trucks gain a 35% share of total medium - and heavy -duty truck sales, and biofuels and hydrogen -based fuels are the main low -carbon options for the aviation and maritime shipping sectors.
In maritime shipping, more than half of total energy use is low -carbon in 2050.
On -site hydrogen production using electrolysis expands in industrial processes, and low-carbon hydrogen is used by 2050 for more than three -quarters of ammonia production and 15% of conventional steel making; it also makes inroads in methanol and refinery processes.
Figure 4.24 ⊳ Remaining CO 2 emissions in selected sectors in the European Union in the Sustainable Development Scenario in 2050 There are some residual emissions in the EU energy sector in 2050, mainly from the sub-s ectors that are most difficult to electrify fully Notes: Transport includes emissions from international aviation and shipping.
There are also 30 Mt CO 2 from agriculture and energy sector own use.
- 500 50 100 150 Transport Industry Buildings PowerMt CO₂Other Bioenergy Gas Coal Space heating Chemicals Cement Road Aviation Shipping Net emissions IEA.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 159 4 Total energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions in 2050 are around 330 Mt, but the use of BECCS in the power and industry sectors absorb 45 Mt CO 2, meaning that net CO 2 emissions are 285 Mt CO 2.
Around half of CO 2 emissions in 2050 come from the transport sector, mostly from international aviation and shipping, and a further 35% from industrial processes, including in the cement and chemical sub -sectors (Figure 4.24 ).
4.4.2 Lessons for policy makers and industry There are a number of useful lessons that emerge from the plans being developed by various countries and regions and from the technologies, measures and approaches they are adopting to achieve net -zero emissions in 2050.
These include:  A net-zero carbon power system needs careful long -term and integrated planning covering all parts of the system .
The energy system has to be considered as a whole .
Almost all new power capacity deployed from today needs to harness low -emissions technologie s to achieve net -zero emissions by mid -century, and existing fossil fuel assets will have to be repurposed, retrofitted with CCUS or retired.
If electricity security is to be maintained, these changes must be accompanied by sufficient investment in electri city networks and flexibility to accommodate the high levels of electricity generation coming from variable renewables.
 Electrification is central to emissions reduction efforts, but low -carbon fuels are also needed .
There are a number of sectors that will require energy sources other than electricity to reduce emissions.
This includes most of the world's shipping, aviation, heavy -duty trucking and certain industrial processes.
Technologies such as hydrogen, CCUS, biomethane and biofuels and other low -carb on fuels will therefore be important.
Some liquid or gaseous fuels can be generated using electricity, but these would require separate delivery infrastructure.
 It is very difficult to eliminate emissions entirely from a number of sectors .
Even with zero -emissions power and a large increase in the use of low -carbon fuels, it would be challenging in the extreme to reduce GHG emissions from every sub -sector to zero.
As a result, it is very likely that some level of CO 2 removal will be required to realise a fully net-zero economy.
Options for this include BECCS, direct air capture and storage, and afforestation.
There is a small level of BECCS in the SDS, with around 0.25 Gt CO 2 absorbed from the atmosphere globally in 2050.
New technologies, a higher level of CO 2 removal, widespread behaviour changes, or a combination of these would be needed to ensure that total emissions are reduced to nearly zero.
 Technology innovation is critical.
Developing new technologies and succ essfully deploying these at scale can take a long time.
It has historically taken 10 -30 years for new energy technologies to go from first prototype to reaching the market (IEA, 2020d) .
In the SDS, development periods for emerging technologies are assumed to be at the lower end of this range, with new small or modular technologies taking less than 15 years from first prototype to reach the market, and larger or non -modular technologies taking less than 20 years.
Policy support is needed to increase research development and deployment spending and encourage risk sharing by private actors.
160 World Energy O utlook 2020 | Sustainable recovery  It is vitally important to engage with citizens to help gain public acceptance for change .
It is possible to achieve large emissions reductions without significantly affecting how citizens engage with or use energy.
However, eliminating all emissions will inevitably have wide -ranging effects on very large numbers of people.
For example, renovating and retrofitting all buildings by 2050 would rely on a high degree of support from the public, as would realising large modal shifts in the transport sector.
Changes in consumer behaviour will also be needed, some of which will likely rely on government policies and regulations, and some of which will require careful handling.
 There is a strong case for considering GHG e missions reductions outside the energy sector within net- zero targets .
In the European Union, emissions from the agriculture and waste sectors produced around 10% of total GHG emissions in 2018; in New Zealand, these s ectors account for more than 50% of its gross GHG emissions.
While the energy sector should be at the forefront of efforts to reduce economy -wide emissions, methods should also be developed concurrently to tackle emissions from other sources.
 Internationa l collaboration can boost efforts .
Achieving widespread net -zero emissions will require careful co -ordination to avoid possible conflicts of interest, to maximise possible synergies and to help build consensus on the importance of emissions reductions.
Cro ss-border and cross -sector collaboration would also help more countries to deploy particular clean energy technolog ies, meaning that costs would fall faster .
Many low -carbon energy technologies and products are traded in global markets, and international collaboration could help align measures that stimulate demand in one country with support for supply in another.
4.5 Conclusions Scientific evidence indicates that the lower the temperature rise from climate change, the lower the risks of extreme weather events such as heat waves, droughts, river and coastal floods and crop failures.
The IPCC has indicated, for example, that limiting the temperature rise to 1.5 °C instead o f 2 °C could result in around 420 million fewer people being frequently exposed to extreme heatwaves and 65 million fewer people being exposed to exceptional heatwaves.
The risk of more frequent and more prolonged droughts is also projected to be substantially larger at 2 °C than at 1.5 °C.
The SDS limi ts the temperature rise to 1.65 °C, with a 50% probability, without recourse to net negative emissions at a global level.
The changes to the global energy sector required to deliver the emissions reductions in the SDS should not be underestimated.
They would require an energy sector transformation of unparalleled magnitude and scope that would rely on the active and continuous support of countries and citizens across the world.
Achieving net -zero GHG emissions globally by 2050 would go well beyond this.
The NZE2050 would require far -reaching changes in consumer behaviour, and would push technology innovation and deployment to their limits.
Chapter 4 | Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 161 4 The pace of change assumed for many technologies in the NZE2050 is unprecedented and would be extremely demanding to realise even if they were to happen in isola tion.
However, the biggest challenge of reducing emissions by 40% in the next ten years is that these changes would need to be realised simultaneously, and at a time when the world is recovering from the fallout of Covid -19.
If any sub -sector or industry w ere to prove a laggard, no other sector would be likely to be able to move any faster to make up the difference.
The changes would also have major implications for energy markets and would need to be carefully managed to minimise unintended consequences.
As citizens strive to increase social and economic wellbeing, they would need to make different lifestyle choices.
Wide- ranging measures and regulations would be needed to frame these future choices.
Some of these might well be unpopular if not handled in a transparent, just and cost -effective way.
It would be necessary to build broad public acceptance of the case for change.
However there are also grounds for optimism.
An ever -increasing number of countries are setting targets and creating plans to reach n et-zero emissions by mid -century.
Innovation and deployment continue to lower the costs of many clean energy technologies, and these will provide many new business opportunities.
The stimulus packages being put forward to combat the economic fallout of the pandemic offer a unique opportunity to reboot energy sectors and set them on a more sustainable pathway.
Our analysis shows that investing $3 trillion in clean energy technologies over the next three years would not only provide a significant boost to the economic recovery and create a large number of jobs, but also kick start a major, structural reduction in emissions globally.
This is a task that would directly impact all members of society, across all regions, and require a singular, unwavering focus from governments, industries and consumers.
The magnitude of the changes required are not something that would be within the power of the energy sector alone to deliver.
It is for governments and their citizens to decide on the way ahead.
All rights reserved.Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 163 Chapter 5 Outlook for energy demand When and where will energy use recover ?
•In the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) , the global economy returns to its pre-C ovid- 19 level in 2021, but remains around 7% smaller over the longer term than projected in the WEO-2019.
Total energy demand also returns to its pre-c risis level by early 2023, though trends and timing vary between countries.
Energy use in advanced economies increases slightly after the crisis, but it does not return to pre-p andemic levels, whereas it rebounds in parts of Asia that had early success in bringing the pandemic under control.
The negative impacts on growth and energy consumption linger longest in a number of lower income countries, where governments are less able to cushion the blows from the pandemic, and goals for energy access and clean cooking risk being delayed.
•Global CO 2 emissions do not surpass 2019 levels until 202 7, even though demand returns to its pre -Covid level in early 2023.
This reflects changes in the energy mix in which renewables prove resilient and flourish in the post -pandemic recovery while coal demand drops sharply in 2020, rebounds only slightly, and then declines steadily.
In the STEPS, CO 2 emissions increase to 36 Gt by 2030, which is lower than the corresponding scenario in the WEO -2019 .
However, the actions taken by governments in the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) put energy systems on a different trajectory , where CO 2 emissions fall to under 27 Gt in 2030.
Figure 5.1 ⊳ Global energy dem and and CO 2 emissions trends in the Stated Policies Scenario to 2030 Energy demand returns to pre -pandemic levels in early 2023, but CO 2 emissions do not until 2027 due to resilient growth in renewables and reduced coal demand 0.81.01.21.41.6 2019 2025 2030 2019 2025 2030Index (2019 = 1.0) Pre-crisis energy demand trajectory Pre-crisis CO₂ trajectoryEnergy demand and CO₂ emissions Key fuel trends Energy demand CO2emissionsRenewables Gas CoalNuclear OilSUMMARY IEA.
164 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return • Growth in the use of renewable energy in the STEPS is primarily driven by utilityscale solar PV and wind projects in the power sector.
Demand for renewables in end-use sectors is more reliant on explicit policy support, especially in a low fuel price environment, but rises steadily after a modest decline in 2020.
Modern bioenergy posts 3% annual growth rate by the late 2020s.
• Coal remains on average 8 % lower through to 2030 than in pre -crisis levels due to a combination of expanding renewables, cheap natural gas and coal phase -out policies.
In advanced economies, coal demand in 2030 is nearly 45% lower than in 2019.
Demand for coal in the power and industry sectors continues to grow in India, Indonesia and Southeast Asia, but its rate is slower than previo usly projected.
In China – by far the world's largest global coal consumer – coal use rebounds in the near term, peaks around 2025, before gradually declining.
• Oil demand recovers from its historic drop in 2020, edging ahead of pre -crisis levels by 2023 i n the STEPS .
Nevertheless, compared to the WEO -2 019 STEPS projection demand is 2 mb/d lower in 2030 and plateaus thereafter.
Vehicle turnover slows , with 9 million consumers deferring car replacements in 2020, but sales of electric vehicles remain resilien t. While road transport accounted for 60% of oil demand growth in the last decade, petrochemicals account for 60% in the next decade, largely as a result of rising demand for plastic s, notably for packaging materials .
The dramatic changes in consumer behav iour in 2020 have a limited overall effect on oil demand in the long run, although aviation takes a while to recover to pre -crisis levels.
• Natural gas recovers quickly from a drop in demand in 2020.
Demand rebounds by almost 3% in 2021, then rises to 14% above 2019 levels by 2030, with growth concentrated in Asia.
Amply supplied global gas markets and record low prices spur growth in price sensitive markets, although policy support remains critical to the expansion of gas infrastructure to meet demand.
In e stablished markets, easy gains from coal- to-gas switching are largely exhausted by the mid- 2020s, after which the prospects for gas start to deteriorate as a result of environmental considerations, increasing competition from renewables, efficiency gains, growing electrification of end-use demand and improving prospects for alternative low -carbon gases, including hydrogen.
• Energy efficiency slows as a result of lower fuel prices and the imperative to rebuild finances after the pandemic which makes companies and households shy away from efficiency upgrades and postpone purchases of new vehicles, equipment and appliances.
This leads to a reduction of 10% in average annual efficiency improvements over the next decade compared with the WEO -2019 projections.
The economic crisis also slows progress in advancing energy access and addressing energy poverty.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 165 5 5.1 Overview This chapter explores the outlook for energy demand at a time when the Covid -19 pandemic makes the development and analys is of energy scenarios more difficult than usual.
Accordingly, WEO -2020 focuses in particular on the critically important decade ahead to 2030.1 In the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) , near -term patterns of energy demand are shaped by where and how pandemic restrictions are lifted and then, more prominently, how the lasting economic impacts affect demand for energy services.
As economies recover, the mix of fuels and technologies to meet energy demand change, influenced by energy, climate and economic policies that constrain or advan ce their rebound.
We also explore how these projections prepared in mid -2020 compare with the projections in the World Energy Outlook -2019 (WEO -2019) (IEA, 2019a) in order to shine a light on areas of continuity and change.
Additional cases, such as the Delayed Recovery Scenario (see Chapter 8), explore what might unfold on the basis of different economic recovery assumptions.
This Outlook not only presents the results of our scenarios but also explores the huge uncertainties that the world now faces.
The future course of Covid -19 infections, the economic outlook and the nature and scope of policy responses could all change in ways that dif fer from our assumptions.
Therefore, we stress once again that the outlook in the STEPS is not an IEA forecast but rather a scenario based on specific assumptions (as outlined in Chapter 2), and that the same is true of the other scenarios we present.
The STEPS illustrates the direction in which existing and announced policies are taking the energy system; it also highlights, for a given set of assumptions, the outlook for public health and economic growth, the impact of the pandemic on the energy sector and the scars it leaves.
We explore these issues across three chapters: this chapter cover s the outlook for demand; Chapter 6 explores the outlook for electricity; and Chapter 7 considers the outlook for energy supply .
5.1.1 Uneven rebound to 2030 Total primary energy demand Total primary energy demand is estimated to fall in 2020 by over 5% and tak e until early 2023 to recover to pre -pandemic levels in the STEPS.
Carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions, on the other hand, do not return to 2019 levels until 2 027.
This is an outcome of changes in the fuel mix during and after the pandemic as renewables and other clean energy sources make gains at the expense of other fuels, notably coal ( Figure 5.2).
Renewables, mainly in the power sector, continue to grow strongly to 2030 in the STEPS, even though electricity demand remains subdued.
Solar photovoltaics (PV) experience Figures and tables from this chapter are accessible through your IEA account : .
1 Scenario projections are out to 2040 and are available in the data tables, despite the minimal focus on those projections in this year's Outlook .
166 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return particularly strong growth over the next decade and beyond.
Natural gas (down around 3% in 2020) and oil (down 8%) see demand sharply rebound as the public health crisis eases and economies recover.
Oil demand from cars returns to pre -crisis levels in 2021, where it plateaus at 2019 demand levels until 2030, before declining.
Petrochemical demand for oil rema ins robust throughout the downturn, however demand for oil in the aviation sector does not return to pre -crisis levels until 2025.
Perhaps most strikingly, coal does not return to pre -crisis levels at all, moving lower again from around 2025 as a result of policies to curb unabated coal use, and fierce price competition from natural gas and renewables in the power sector (see Chapter 6).
Figure 5.2 ⊳ Total primary energy demand in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019 and 2030 The pandemic causes a momentary slowdown for cleaner energy sources, but for coal, the declines in 2020 jumpstart structural declines in the next decade Note: Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent; 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Final energy consumption by sector As the world emerges from Covid -19 lockdowns, energy consumption from industry rallies quickly, returning to pre -crisis levels by 2022, wh ile energy consumption in transport and non-residential buildings takes a little longer and remains below previous levels until 2023 (Figure 5.3).
Energy consumption in residential buildings did not fall, but rather increased in 2020 under stay -at-home ord ers.
In 2025, total final energy consumption remains below pre-crisis2 trajectories, but returns to annual growth rates of 1.2% for the remainder of the decade , consistent with growth rates anticipated in pre -pandemic projections.
Effectively, the crisis puts overall final energy consumption about 2.5 years behind previous W orld Energy Outlook (WEO) projections.
2 Mentions of pre -cr isis/pandemic trajectories/projections are represented by the WEO -2 019 Stated Policies Scenario projection .
26%32%23%5% 10% 4% Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Renewables Traditional use of biomass2019 14 406 Mtoe -1 000- 500 0 500 2020 2030Annual changes in TPEDMtoe 22%30%24% 5% 15% 4%2030 15 755 Mtoe e IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 167 5 Figure 5.3 ⊳ Total final consumption in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Energy consumption recovers in buildings and industry by 2022, and in transport by 2023.
After 2025, demand growth stabilises at 1.2% annually, similar to pre-p andemic projections This lower level of projected energy consumption is driven by near -term economic conditions, particularly in emerging market and developing economies, which keep consumer demand for energy services low for the first -half of the 2020s.
In low -income regions, economic setbacks hinder extension of access to electricity and clean cooking, and in regions where people have recently gained access to these services, there is a risk that they may revert to traditional and inefficient fuels owin g to increased economic stress.
These effects, although present in the STEPS, are far more profound in the Delayed Recovery Scenario (see Chapter 8).
The economic crisis also slows energy efficiency improvements .
In the STEPS, energy efficiency improvemen ts between today and 2030 save around 10% less than in prepandemic projections .
People delay purchases of new vehicles, equipment and appliances, which leaves more inefficient stock in use for longer.
Industries with uncertain revenues focus only on core business expenditure, slowing energy efficiency upgrades.
The pace of retrofits and new building construction also slackens.
Despite energy efficiency receiving support in some economic recovery plans, under current economic and policy conditions efficienc y improvements remain slower than was e xpected before the pandemic .
However, the deceleration in energy demand growth outweighs the slowdown in efficiency improvements, with the result that over the decade global energy demand is down by over 7 000 Mtoe an d CO 2 emissions are nearly 17 gigatonnes (Gt) lower than in pre -crisis projections.
Industrial energy demand does not see major impacts in the STEPS after the crisis, although demand for petrochemicals and plastics increases, driven by low prices and increased consumer demand for hygiene products.
Demand for some construction materials re mains relatively subdued, but may be stabilised in countries where construction is stimulated by economic recovery packages.
Market uncertainty means that few industries expand 0.80.91.01.11.21.3 2019 2025 2030Index (2019 = 1.0)Final consumption normalised 8 0009 00010 00011 00012 000 2019 2025 2030Mtoe Industry Transport Buildings and agriculture Non-energy usePre-crisisLoss of final consumption IEA.
168 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return production capacity in the short term.
Transport demand remains lower as people travel less, in some cases because of continued restrictions on international travel and lower levels of disposable income.
Increased working from home reduces transport demand in the near term, but a shift from public transport to private vehicles offset s some of the demand reduction (see Box 5.2).
There is a slowdown in energy efficiency improvements across all end -use sectors in the STEPS.
Consumer spending remains sluggish.
Upgrades are often made only when unavoidable, for example when a piece of equipment stops working.
When replacements are bought, they are often less efficient than they might be, as consumers become more sensitive to the higher upfront costs often associated with the most efficient models, and as low fuel prices elongate payback per iods for standard efficiency measures by 20 -40% in buildings, around 10% in industry and 20 -30% in vehicles.
Passenger car fleet efficiency sees 20% less improvement from pr evious projections, but still improve to around 7 litres per 100 k ilometres (k m) in 2030 down from over 9 litres per 100 km in 2020.
Energy intensity impr ovements in industry slow to 1.5% annually in the coming decade , down f rom last decade's levels of 1.9 %.
Energy efficiency investment in residential buildings is lower than previous pro jections, leading to a 7 % increase of energy consumed per square metre in 2030 compared to pre -crisis projections .
Total primary energy demand by region Four regional patterns emerge from the pandemic recovery in the STEPS projections to 2030, while specifics for individual regions are detailed in Figure 5.4:  Advanced economies, including the European Union and the United States, where demand does not return to 2019 levels, and where recovery accelerates the deployment of renewables and the decline of coal.
 The Asia Pacific region, including China and India, where rising economic growth drives up demand for all fuels.
Renewables lead in terms of absolute growth, followed by natural gas, then oil.
Asia Pacific is the only region to see growth in coal demand, primarily in India and Southeast Asia.
 Oil and gas exporting economies where lower oil and gas revenues reduce economic activity, in particular in the Middle East and Eurasia.
Gas and oil satisfy most domestic energy demand growth, but renewables gain some ground amid efforts to diversify elect ricity supply.
The outlook in these economies depends on the speed at which global energy systems transition away from imported oil and gas, and on the success of domestic efforts to diversify their economies away from fossil fuels.
 Emerging market and developing economies, including in Africa and Central and South America, where increasing levels of energy use per capita drive rapid demand growth.
Renewables account for most power system growth, and oil for most transport demand growth.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 169 5 Figure 5.4 ⊳ Changes in primary energy demand by fuel and region in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Renewables see the most growth in all regions, followed by gas, while coal use declines.
Demand growth is highest in China and India Note: GDP CAAGR = gross domestic product compound average annual growth rate; C & S America = Central and South America .
In the United States , coal demand is set to decline faster than in pre -crisis projections with electricity demand down and renewables and natural gas able to satisfy the majority of that demand.
Coal ends the decade down by 50% and below European levels.
Oil demand is similar to those in the WEO -2019 projections, with slower transport activity growth being offset by the replacement of the previous vehicle efficiency standards (CAFE) with the now finalised Safer Affordable Fuel Efficient ( SAFE ) rules.
In the Europe an Union, renewable energy use rises over 40% above 2019 level s by 2030, driven in large part by greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction policies.
Natural gas and oil demand rebound, but then decline steadily to 2030, while coal demand drops by 50%.
As a result non -fossil fuels increase their share of the primary energy mix from around 30% in 2019 to nearly 40% in 2030.
The European Green Deal3 would further accelerate the decline of fossil fuels (see Chapter 4).
Japan sees a 20 -25% decline in the use of fossil f uels by 2030 , driven by fuel switching in the power sector and e nergy efficiency advances that help reduce energy demand by around 10% in 2030.
The power sector sees increases in renewable s and nuclear generation, with some of Japan's nuclear power plants progressively re -starting in line with the country's Strategic Energy Plan.
Improving fossil fuel power plant efficiency also features prominently in the plan, as do longer term objectives to phase out inefficient coal 3 The European Green Deal is a set of policy initiatives by the European Commission with the overarching aim of making Europe climate neutral in 2050.
-5%0%5%10% -2500 250 500 China Africa Middle EastJapan European UnionMtoe Coal Oil Gas Renewables Nuclear GDP CAAGR (right axis)India Southeast AsiaC & S AmericaUnited States IEA.
170 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return and switch to gas.
I ncreas ing numbers of efficient and hybrid electric vehicles drive substantial reductions in oil demand.
China recovered quickly from the crisis in terms of energy demand, which sees only a 1% decline in 2020 before rising to 13% above 2019 levels by 2030.
Driven by strong policy support, renewables account for around nearly half of the growth and natural gas for around one -third.
Even with a rollback of wind and solar subsidies, China is set to add nearly 70 gigawatts (GW) of wind and solar PV capacity in 2020, surpassing record installation in 2018.
Air quality policies encourage gas use over coal, with liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal expansion and recent market liberalisation supporting the scale up of gas use.
Coal use is expected to increase in the power sector, but decline in the buildings and industry sectors.
A n ew 2025 target for "new energy vehicles" along with extended subsidies in China's recent stimulus package help limit oil demand growth, although rising petrochemical demand partially offsets this effect.
India sees energy demand grow by an average of 2.6% annually through to 2030.
Coal accounts for nearly 30% of the growth to 2030, of which almost 40% is in the power sector.
Oil demand growth makes up another 30% of total growth to 2030, but is 4% lower than in previous projections because the crisis leads more consumers to opt for two/threewheelers instead of cars in the coming decade.
Recent announcements show continued support for electric vehicles (EVs) that help EV sales remain resilient during the c risis.
Solar PV growth also remains resilient , meeting 10% of all primary energy demand growth to 2030.
In the Central and South America region energy demand increases 1.3% annually through to 2030, though this is a slightly lower level than previous projections and there is a risk of increased energy poverty.
Total renewables are set to increase by roughly 30% over 2019 levels by 2030, particularly solar PV, and to meet over 60% of new demand.
Bioenergy plays an important role with in the agricultural sector, particularly in Brazil, and accordingly biofuel production is likely to continue to benefit from policy support throughout the decade.
Africa sees annual energy demand growth of 2.0% to 2030 in the STEPS, which assumes adequate investment will be forthcoming.
If it does not materialise, demand growth could well be lower.
The pandemic means that projected electricity demand per capita in 2030 is 5% lower than in the WEO -2019 , and more than 20 million fewer people than previously estimated gain access to electricity.
Without measures to prevent this, progress towards access and energy poverty objectives slow, making universal access as called for in the relevant UN Sustainable Development Goal (SDG 7) increasingly difficult to achiev e in the next decade.
In the Middle East, oil and gas meet 80% of new demand growth over the decade ahead in the STEPS.
These projections are highly dependent on oil and natural gas price recovery.
If prices rise higher than expected, the prospects for ren ewables could improve; if gas prices remain low, strained finances may keep the focus on utilising gas and oil domestically to meet new demand.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 171 5 These projections are highly dependent on the recovery pathway that the world takes, particularly how energy may figure into economic recovery packages, with quite a few governments already announcing their stimulus will focus on a green recovery.
The outcomes of a global green recovery and a shift to a more sustainable pathway are described in Chapter 3 in the Sust ainable Development Scenario (SDS).
We explore how the projections in the STEPS compare to the SDS briefly in this chapter in Box 5.1.
Box 5.1 ⊳ Energy trends in the Stated Policies and Sustainable Development scenarios The Covid -19 crisis has shaken up previous assumptions about the development of energy systems.
The STEPS describes a pathway forward from a new, post -crisis starting point, but still under existing policy as of mid -2020.
However, new policy directions and recovery measures could help to accelerate clean energy transitions.
In this Outlook , the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) fully incorporates the Sustainable Recovery Plan from the recent Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report (IEA, 2020a ).
Based on rigorous analysis conducted in co -operation with the International Monetary Fund, the Sustainable Recovery Plan sets out how costeffective investment in the next three years (i.e.
from 2021 to 2023) could support economic growth and job creation, while also shifting global energy systems onto the SDS trajectory.
Such a shift would put CO 2 emissions on course for a steady decline, whereas emissions in the STEPS rebound and continue to climb to 2040.
Efficiency improvements – and lots of them early on – are essential to move to the SDS trajectory.
Efficiency gains account for more than one -third of the cumulative CO 2 emissions reductions between the STEPS and SDS to 2 030.
In the Sustainable Recovery Plan, efficiency represents the largest share of investment, which ramps up investment in energy efficiency by roughly $420 billion annually (IEA, 2020a).
Efforts across all sectors result in primary energy intensity improv ements of the global economy of 3.5% annually in the SDS from 2020 -30, up from 2.1% in the STEPS.
Accompanying this surge in efficiency is a decline in oil and coal demand in the SDS.
Coal sees the largest reduction: in the STEPS, coal use in 2030 is 7% be low 2019 levels ; in the SDS, it is over 40% below (Figure 5.5).
This implies a nearly 80% reduction in coal use in advanced economies and a 30% reduction in the rest of the world in 2030.
Oil demand moves onto a downward trajectory by the early 2020s in the SDS, after which continued efficiency gains, biofuels increases and electrification drive demand down by 1 million barrels per day (mb/d) each year through to 2030 and by 2 mb/d each year in the 2030s.
In the STEPS, oil demand stabilises at around 10 4 mb/d, whereas in the SDS it falls by a third to 66 mb/d in 2040, with road transport responsible for over 60% of this reduction.
172 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Global natural gas dem and peaks in the mid -2020s in the SDS before falling at roughly 0.8% annually, declining back to 2019 demand levels by 2030.
Advanced economies drive the decline between 2025 and 2030, while regions with rapidly growing electricity demand and large coal fleets continue to rely on gas for fuel switching before their demand peaks in the late 2030s.
All of the roughly 600 billion cubic metres (bcm) of gas demand growth to 2030 projected in the STEPS would be unnecessary in the SDS.
Figure 5.5 ⊳ Change in total primary energy in the Stated Policies and Sustainable Development scenarios, 2019-2030 Efficiency gains account for one- third of the difference between the scenarios which drive down demand for coal and oil as does increased renewables in power generation Note: Modern bioenergy includes biogas, biofuel and modern biomass, but excludes the traditional use of biomass (i.e.
burning of wood and charcoal in inefficient cook stoves).
Nuclear and hydro energy are not pictured due to scale and space constraints.
Both grow slightly higher in the SDS compared to STEPS, with many plants refurbished instead of being decommissioned.
Growth in solar and wind generation in the power sector help to re -shape the power sector in the SDS.
The STEPS projections show 2.4 -times more wind and 4.2 -times more solar PV generation by 2030, whereas the SDS sees grow th of 4.3-times and 6.5 -times respectively .
This would require annual capacity additions for both technologies to be around 2.5 -times as large in 2030 compared with 2019 .
Together, these actions bring CO 2 emissions in the SDS down to 26.7 Gt in 2030 and 16.9 Gt in 2040, whereas emissions in the STEPS rise to 36.0 Gt in 2030 and to 36.3 Gt in 2040.
-2 000 -1 500 -1 000 - 500 0 500Modern bioenergySolarWindNatural gasOilCoal MtoeSDS STEPS IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 173 5 5.1.2 Beyond 2030 Total primary energy Although total primary energy demand returns to pre -crisis growth rates in the 2020s, the level of demand remains on average about 2.5 years behind projections in the WEO -2019 through the 2030s.
Electrification rates and electricity consumption per capita lag by two to three years, and energy access for all lags by seven years relative to previous 2030 projections.
Growth in energy use, especially in emerging market and developing countries, does not reach the levels previously projected in the 2020s, deferring much of that growth into the 2030s.
These delays in growth mean that the world starts t he 2030s having released 17 Gt less CO 2 into the atmosphere than in pre -pandemic projections.
These reduced emissions, however, come at the cost of suppressed economic activity, delays in socio -economic development and deferment of new energy services that would have improved the livelihoods of many globally.
This delay in energy demand growth also results in some of this growth being met through less carbon -intensive way, which keeps annual emissions lower than previously projected from 2030 onward.
By 2030, consumer purchases have returned to previously projected growth rates, speeding up the turnover of appliances and vehicles back to previous rates.
When these delayed purchases are made, some of them are more efficient than they would have been if bought during the 2020s, making up for some of the efficiency slowdown in the 2020s.
The delayed demand growth also means that a portion of the previously forecasted growth occurs when prices for renewables have fallen further, and more of this growth is met by renewables.
Figure 5.6 ⊳ Total primary energy demand by key fuels in the Stated Policies Scenario relative to the WEO-2019, 2030-2040 Most primary fuels start the 2030s at or lower than pre- crisis projections, but heading to 2040, renewables rise above prior projections, while coal further diverges downward Note: Nuclear (not pictured) does not change substantially from pre- pandemic projections, and starts in 2030 at around 800 Mtoe expanding to around 900 Mtoe in 2040.
2 0003 0004 0005 000 2030 2035 2040Mtoe Stated Policies Scenario Pre-crisisRenewablesCoalOil Gas IEA.
174 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return The total amount of primary energy provided by renewables in 2030 is slightly higher than in the WEO -2019 projections , and from there, renewable energy use expands faster than the previous outlook for the 2030 -40 period (Figure 5.6).
Renewables are unique in this respect.
Lower electricity demand due to the crisis makes renewable targets, when expressed as shares of total generation, easier to achieve with less new capacity added.
However, ongoing reductions in renewables costs, rising fossil fuel prices and additional decarbonisation targets in Europe all help renewable capacity growth to be higher during the 2030s in the STEPS than in previous projections.
Wind energy expands by over 60% in the 2030- 40 decade and solar PV doubles.
Yet, in 2040 wind and solar each account for only 3% of total primary energy demand, both up from below 2% in 2030.
Oil demand reaches a long plateau in 2030 .
Increases in demand for transport services and petrochemicals offset lower demand due to improved vehicle efficiency, greater use of biofuels across all transport modes, and rapid electrification of private cars, urban buses and two/three -wheelers.
The pace of growth for modern bioenergy slows in the 2030s linked to the tapering off of oil demand growth.
This assumes that there are no changes in blending specifications that would increase use of biofuels.
Natural gas demand continues to rise at 1.2% per year over the 2030 -40 p eriod, which is slightly lower than pre -crisis projections because cost -effective fuel switching previously foreseen as taking place after 2030 now takes place in the 2020s.
Gas growth increasingly comes from industrial demand instead of the power sector as renewables account for a rising share of generation in the power sector.
Coal demand declines by 0.6 % year -on-year during the 2030s, which is faster than pre -crisis projections, even with coal demand starting at a lower level in 2030 as a result of the pandemic and its aftermath.
From 2030 -40, 65% of the decline is in the power sector, though industrial coal demand also drops.
Hydrogen and carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) begin to play a role in the late 2020s, and spend the 2030s scaling up with some policy support.
Recent interest in hydrogen in recovery plans (European Union, Australia and China) as well as increased commitment by oil and gas companies however could accelerate the development and deployment of hydrogen.
This push increas es the outlook for hydrogen production levels in this year's STEPS above previous projections.
In the STEPS, low -carbon hydrogen production reaches 10 Mtoe by 2040, while this level is reached rather quickly in this decade in the SDS.
CCUS has seen almost 4 billion USD in government and industry commitments so far in 2020.
Along with new emissions reduction targets in Europe, CCUS projects were revised upward from those in the WEO -2019 STEPS.
In 2040, CCUS covers less than 1% of coal and gas use in the STEP S, compared to around 25% of coal and 10% of gas in the SDS.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 175 5 CO 2 emissions in 2030 are 36.0 Gt in the STEPS, 1.4 Gt lower than previously projected, and climb around 0.1% annually until 2040, a slightly slower pace than previously projected.
The slower pac e of emissions growth reflects additional policy commitments to long -term emissions reductions, efficiency improvements, faster electrification of transport and a modest increase in the role of hydrogen.
Policy impacts Changes in the STEPS from year -to-year in the World Energy Outlook generally reflect new or updated policies that have been announced.
The major changes in this 2020 Outlook clearly are a result of the Covid -19 pandemic, responses to this crisis and ensuing macroeconomic changes.
But the impacts of policy development on energy scenarios are also more complicated than in past years, with relevant polic y impacts taking three fo rms:  New energy -related policies that have been put in place or updated, including those put in place (or rolled back, even if temporarily) in response to the crisis.
Those that are incorporated into this Outlook 's Stated Policies Scenario are detailed in Table 5.1 which specifies which were added pre -crisis and which are in response to the pandemic.
(A full list of these policies is presented in Annex B).
 New policies and measures in response to the crisis that are not energy related, but have an important impact on macroeconomic drivers of energy use.
Economic stimulus measures that drive up industrial production will also create more emissions and energy demand, and are reflected in the underlying gross domestic produc t (GDP) and activity assumptions.
 Existing policies that, due to crisis -related changes in the economy and energy use, now regulate or influence energy use in new ways.
There are a number of examples of existing policies having different or less significant effects than those originally envisaged.
For instance, targets that specify a share of renewables or level of decarbonisation may drive less renewable capacity additions since energy demand is lower than was projected before the pandemic.
Similarly, lowe r oil demand may result in the use of biofuels in blended fuels falling below previous projections.
New efficiency standards may have less impact as turnover of energy -consuming equipment slows.
Conversely, fleet efficiency standards may spur the uptake of higher shares of efficient vehicles and EVs .
176 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Table 5.1 ⊳ Selected new energy-related policies adopted in 2019 and 2020 by country New energy -related policies Countries adopting in 2019 or 2020 Countries adopting as a part of Covid -19 response Industry • Industrial energy efficiency standards and incentives Brazil, China, Germany, India, Netherlands, Turkey, United Kingdom, Viet Nam China, European Union Transport • Electric vehicle or efficient vehicle incentives China, France, German y, India, Italy, New Zealand China, European Union, Italy, Spain, United Kingdom • Biofuel blending or incentives Brazil, Ireland Indonesia • Cash- for-clunkers China France, Spain • CO 2 emissions standards European Union, New Zealand • Fleet modernisation (e.g.
taxis, buses, police) European Union, Germany, Korea • EV production support India Germany • EV charging infrastructure Austria, India, Netherlands European Union, Germany Buildings • Appliance efficiency standards Canada, China, Egypt, Nigeria, United States, Viet Nam, China • Cooling plan China, India • Higher efficiency building codes Argentina, China, France, Ukraine , United States • Clean heating incentives Australia, Germany, New Zealand, United Kingdom United Kingdom • Retrofit subsidies Estonia, Germany, Ireland, Poland, Ukraine China, European Union , Germany • Public housing & government building retrofits Germany, Portugal, United Kingdom • Efficient appliance incentives Italy, Korea Korea • Energy efficiency audits Morocco Korea • Financing for community energy transitions Canada, Poland Crosscutting • Carbon pricing Canada, Singapore, South Africa • Circular economy European Union European Union, Korea • Energy and emissions reduction targets European Union, Italy, New Zealand , United Kingdom • Energy poverty or access Italy India • Hydrogen Japan Australia, European Union, Spain • CCUS United States Rollback of policies • Emissions/efficiency standards United States (CAFE) China (intensity targets), South Africa (SO 2 emissions) Notes: CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; CAFE = US Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards.
E uropean Union indicates policies at the European Union level; when a member country is mentioned, it indicates a domestic policy.
The European Green Deal is incorporated in this Outlook.
The Green Deal's specific programmes and targets that ar e included in the 2021 -2027 budget period are considered in the STEPS, while longer term targets beyond the 2027 horizon are considered in the SDS scenario.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 177 5 5.2 Oil Global oil demand has been on an almost unbroken rising trend for decades , a run that was only occasionally interrupted by a series of economic downturns.
However, the Covid -19 pandemic hit the oil market with unprecedented scale and ferocity, erasing almost a decade of growth in a single year.
Extensive lockdowns resulted in a reduction in oil dem and of over 20 mb/d in April, taking a particularly heavy toll on transport fuels (IEA, 2020b) .
There have been some signs of recovery, but aversion to air travel, increased teleworking and resilient EV sales have continued to weigh on oil demand, and demand for 2020 as a whole looks likely to be around 8 mb/d lower than it was in 2019.
Oil demand has rebounded quickly after previous crises and resumed growth as the economy recovered.
Will it be different this time?
There are a number of factors that underpin this year's outlook, reflecting emerging new dynamics in a post -pandemic landscape.
Suppressed economic growth in the near term leaves scars which could have longer term impacts on industrial and trade activities, and in turn on oil demand.
Many countries have announced stimulus plans to promote economic growth after lockdowns.
Some of these include energy -related measures (e.g.
to promote EVs) notably in the European Union, which would affect oil demand.
The fall in fossil fuel prices offers an opportunity to remove fossil fuel consumption subsidies without large impacts on consumers or inflation.
However, the priority of most governments has been to limit the damage to households and companies from the crisis, and there have been relatively few new initiatives so far on pricing reform.
There is also a question mark over how long some of the behaviour changes prompted by the crisis will last.
S ome could be relatively long lasting, such as increased teleworking, but others may prove to be short -lived.
Mo reover, these behaviour changes often have complex and unexpected impacts, some of which are in conflict with others, and this requires a careful approach when assessing their net impacts .
In this section, we assess how these various factors may shape the longer term oil demand trajectory and explore how various uncertainties might take oil demand in the STEPS in different directions.
5.2.1 Overview of oil demand trends In the STEPS, global oil demand grows by 5 mb/d in 2021 and returns to pre -crisis levels by around 2023.
Thereafter demand rises by 0.7 mb/d each year on average through to 2030, although the effects of the Covid -19 pandemic on the economy and trade mean that demand in 2030 remains lower by 2 mb/d than in the WEO -2019 ( Figure 5.7).
Beyond 2030, global oil demand reaches a plateau, with annual growth slowing to 0.1 mb/d per year .
There is a high degree of uncertainty around the shape of the economi c recovery, which could turn out to be slower than assumed in the STEPS (see Chapter 8).
178 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Figure 5.7 ⊳ Global oil demand in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2010-2030 Global oil demand returns to pre -crisis levels by around 2023, but remains lower by 2 mb/d in 2030 than in the pre-crisis projections Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
The outlook differs widely by region.
Peak oil demand is already a reality in advanced economies, with demand well below the high point reached in 2005.
Oil demand in advanced economies recovers in the near term, but never returns to pre -crisis levels in t he period to 2030.
The European Union is the largest contributor to this trend: a strong policy push for electrification and efficiency improvement means that its oil demand in 2030 is lower by 2.3 mb/d than in 2019.
Overall oil demand in advanced economie s falls by nearly 5 mb/d between 2019 and 2030.
This reduction is more than offset by a rise of 9 mb/d in oil demand growth in emerging market and developing economies, an increase which is nearly twice the size of the fall in demand in advanced economies.
India's oil demand has been revised down by 0.4 mb/d in 2030 compared with our projections in 2019, but India remains the largest source of growth in oil this coming decade, mainly because of increased use of oil for transport – the level of car ownership is less than one -fifth of the global average and is set to rise.
The outlook for China has also been revised downwards, reflecting lower car sales and strengthened policy goals such as the new energy vehicle (NEV) 25% sales target by 2025 and a delay in the phase out of NEV subsidies.
4 Oil demand in China peaks around 2030 at just over 15 mb/d, but China nonetheless remains an important contributor to global oil demand growth in the interim.
Africa and Southeast Asia also contribute to oil demand growth.
4 China is targeting new energy vehicles (NEVs) to reach 25% of all car sales by 2025, up from the previous target of "more than 20%".
NEVs include battery electric vehicles, plug -in hybrid electric vehicles and fuel cell electric vehicles.
80 90 100 110 120 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030mb/d Pre-crisis Stated Policies Scenario Reaching 2019 levels e IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 179 5 Table 5.2 ⊳ Key post-Covid uncertainties affecting oil demand Potential uncertainties by sector Lower demand Higher demand Cars • Continued slowdown in car sales .
• Less commuting by car due to wider adoption of teleworking .
• Push for public transport/ electrification widely ingrained in stimulus packages beyond the E uropean Union.
• Fossil fuel pricing reforms accelerated in many countries .
• Sustained reluctance to return to public transport .
• Further delays in car replacement dampening efficiency gains.
• SUV sales continue to accelerate.
• Delay in or retraction of biofuel blending targets .
Trucks • Delays in economic rebound .
• Batteries, natural gas and hydrogen widely adopted in the medium and heavy truck segments .
• Increased use of e -commerce, served by less efficient light trucks .
Aviation • Fewer business trips due to more video conferences and wider aversion to noncritical personal trips .
• Wider modal shift towards trains and buses for short -haul travel.
• Faster development of biofuels, batteries and hydrogen for planes .
• Potential delays in regulatory efforts to reduce emissions .
• Sustained low oil prices widen the cost gap with low -carbon fuels .
Shipping • Deterioration in global trade.
• Strengthened efforts to shorten and/or localise supply chains.
• Faster developments of alternative options (biofuels, ammonia, hydrogen) .
• Potential delays in regu latory efforts to reduce emissions .
• Sustained low oil prices widen the cost .
Petrochemicals • Weakened economic growth .
• Policies/infrastructure to tackle plastic waste strengthened in emerging/developing economies .
• Possible weakening of policies lead s to higher demand for single- use plastics and packaging materials .
• Accelerated replacement of other bulk materials by plastics .
Industry, buildings, power • Strong push for energy efficiency.
• Accelerated oil- to-gas switching in the Middle East .
• Slower fuel switching due to low oil prices .
• Strong push for liquefied petroleum gas for cooking .
The speed and scale of dema nd recovery also varies by sector ( Table 5.2).
Those that were less impacted by the pandemic (e.g.
petrochemicals, trucks) return to pre -crisis levels of demand relatively quickly whereas some of the hardest hit sectors (e.g.
aviation) take many years to recover.
In the 2010s, road transport played a major role in pushing up oil demand, accounting for 60% of total demand growth.
Petrochemical feedstocks take the lead between 2019 and 2030, accounting for the same 60% share in total demand growth, with trucks becoming the second- biggest source of growth ( Figure 5.8).
180 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Figure 5.8 ⊳ Oil demand by sector in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 The pace of demand recovery varies by sector; there is a notable divergence in the outlook for transport fuels and petrochemical feedstock Notes: Buildings and industry oil demand does not return above 2019 levels.
Passenger vehicles include cars, buses and two/ three -wheelers.
5.2.2 Oil demand by sector Passenger cars The pandemic and extensive lockdowns took a heavy toll on both transport activities and the pace of new car sales.
The latest mobility data show that transport activities recover quite fast as countries relax their initial broad lockdown measures, but they fall back when restrictive measures are reintroduced to contain new virus outbreaks.
The number of cars sold globally over the first -half of 2020 dropped by nearly 30% compared to the same period in 2019, but the impact on sales has not affected different powertrains equally.
Sales of electric cars have been relatively resilient during the pandemic, helped by strong policy support in many countries, and the share of EVs in total car sales is expected to rise to over 3% in 2020 from around 2.5% in 2019.
During the last decade, the growth of oil demand for cars was underpinned by a significant expansion of the car fleet.
There are still strong underlying reasons to expect a growing number of cars in the future, given that average car ownership levels in emerging market and developing economies are one -sixth of th e levels in advanced economies.
However, the turbulence in the car market in the last two years points to a different pattern of evolution in the global market.
The pandemic and its after -effects mean that the total number of cars in 2030 is 7% smaller in the STEPS than projected in the WEO -2019 (Box 5.2).
But the number of electric cars on the road in the STEPS remains similar at around 110 million in 2030, rising to over 330 million in 2040, thanks to the recent policy developments in the European Union and in China (e.g.
This implies 10 20 30 2019 2030mb/d 2019 levelsPassenger vehicles 10 20 30 2019 2030Long -distance transport Trucks Aviation Shipping 10 20 30 2019 2030Petrochemicals and others Petchem feedstock Buildings Industry IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 181 5 a much higher share of electric cars in the total car stock, which leads to an anticipated peak in conventional car sales in the mid -2020s.
This reinforces oil demand for cars plateauing in this decade at roughly 2019 levels of demand, before declining after 2030.
Box 5.2 ⊳ Disentangling the pushes and pulls of passenger car oil demand There is a question mark over how persistent changes in car usage may be after the pandemic recedes.
Lockdowns and continued control measures have increased the prevalence of teleworking; the STEPS scenario assumes some of this persists, with teleworking e stimated to cut around 0.25 mb/d of demand by 2030 .
On the other hand, other changes in the way the world travels (some predating the pandemic) may push up oil demand.
A shift away from public transport to private cars is set to increase oil demand by 0.6 mb/d on average for the coming two years, although in the STEPS this gradually diminishes in later years.
A continued consumer preference for sport utility vehicles (called "SUVisation") also pushes up demand: in the STEPS, the market share of SUVs in tota l car sales increases from 41% in 2019 to 51% by 2030, resulting in a boost to oil demand of 0.2 mb/d in 2030.
If this share were to increase further to nearly 70% by 2030, it would add an extra 0.4 mb/d to the level of demand assumed in the STEPS.
Figure 5.9 ⊳ Impacts of deferred car sales on oil demand relative to pre-crisis projected trends, 2020 and 2025 Delayed replacements and new purchases of passenger cars related to the pandemic are expected to increase oil demand by almost 50 kb/d in 2025 Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Other factors, like the slower pace of new passenger car sales, also have multiple effects on the demand outlook.
In 2020, the number of new car sales is expected to - 200 - 100 0 100 2002020e 2025Impact on oil demand Increase from delayed replacement Reduction from delayed new ownership Net change kb/d 30 60 90 1202020e 2025Car sales Replacement New ownership Delayed replacement Delayed new ownership Million vehicles IEA.
182 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return drop by 11 million, down by nearly 15% from the level expected before the crisis.
Our region -by-region calculations suggest that over 9 million consumers postp oned replacement of an old car (slowing efficiency gains) and over 2 million first -time buyers decided to delay the purchase of a new car (slowing oil demand growth).
In the STEPS, a reduction in car sales compared to the pre -pandemic trajectory continues out toward the 2030s (where it nears zero).
In 2025, sales remain short of pre-pandemic projections by 5 million, and these postponements of car replacements raises oil demand by around 200 thousand barrels per day (kb/d), but this is partially offset by d elayed new car ownership, netting out to an increase of around 50 kb/d (Figure 5.9).
In the STEPS, we assume that the pace of car fleet turnover gradually returns to a prepandemic level.
However, if the delays in replacement seen in 2020 are sustained for longer than expected, the impacts on oil demand and emissions could be significant.
Whether or not there are such delays could be influenced by the intr oduction of policy measures (e.g.
If well targeted, these policies would help incentivise buyers to replace their old car with a new one compliant with higher efficiency and environmental standards.
Trucks Oil demand for trucks, including light -, medium - and heavy- duty trucks, was relatively less affected by the pandemic than other transport modes, as factories and farms continued to deliver essential goods.
In the STEPS, oil demand for trucks quickly recovers to surpass the pre-crisis levels by 2022 and then increases further by 1.5 mb/d through to 2030, driven by growth in road freight activity.
Trucks become the second -largest contributor to total demand growth over the period to 2030, after petrochemicals.
As things stand, oil demand would rise by over 6 mb/d by 2030 over 2019 levels to meet all additional demand for goods transportation.
However, a variety of factors help reduce this amount to nearly 2 mb/d.
Despite a rise in urban deliveries, oil demand for light -duty trucks decreases from the mid -2020s and ends up 7% lower by 2030 than in 2019 thanks to the uptake of electric powertrains and efficiency improvements in logistics stemming from digitalisation.
This reduction is however more than offset by increases in demand for medium - and heavy -duty trucks.
As companies strive to optimise logistics, medium - and heavy -duty trucks play an increasing role in carrying goods, and they account for the overwhelming majority of road freight activity growth between 2019 and 2030.
However , heavy trucks are harder to electrify than light -duty trucks, and alternative fuels such as biofuels, LNG and hydrogen displace only modest amount of oil (around 0.4 mb/d in 2030).
Although improved engine efficiency and optimised logistics (for medium -duty trucks) play a large role in curbing demand, offsetting more than 60% of growth due to increased activity, oil demand for these truck segments continues to grow by 1.4% per year over the period to 2030 (Figure 5.10 ).
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 183 5 Figure 5.10 ⊳ Oil demand for trucks and key drivers of change between 2019 and 2030 in the Stated Policies Scenario Oil demand for trucks continues to rise as medium- and heavy -duty trucks play an expanding role in road freight activity There is, however, some uncertainty about the rate of oil demand growth for trucks.
If medium - and heavy -duty trucks were to see a faster uptake of electric powertrains, this could lead to a notable reduction in demand.
There is growing interest in electric heavyduty trucks in China, the European Union and the United States.
In China, f or example, over 6 000 electric heavy -duty trucks were sold in 2019, 60% more than in 2017, although the cumulative sales to date amount to only 0.1% of heavy -duty trucks on the road (and it takes some time for changes in sales volumes to have a meaningful impact on oil demand).
However, other developments could raise oil demand for trucks.
Despite its growing electrification, faster growth in the light -duty truck market could lead to a substantial rise in oil demand because the overall light -duty truck fleet is much less efficient than other truck categories (in terms of energy use per tonne of product transported).
For example, more rapid e -commerce growth could lead to increased use of vans or light trucks, which could in turn push up oil demand.
Aviation Aviation was the transport sub -sector hardest hit by Covid -19, with formal restrictions on international travel leading to a sudden and staggering fall in demand .
Air travel was 90% below its pre -crisis level in Europe at the end of April 2020, and 7 0% be low it in Asia.
The drop in aviation oil demand for the year as a whole is expected to be around 3 mb/d, a 40% decline from 2019.
In the STEPS, aviation activity – the number of revenue -paying passengers multiplied by the distance travel led – returns to 2019 levels around 2024 , and it takes another year after that for oil demand to return to pre -crisis levels; this is in line with the expectations of major airlines, aviation institutions and trade bodies, such as the International Air Transp ort Association.
4 8 12 2019 2030 2019 2030 2019 2030mb/d Change in activity Changes in fleet utilisation Engine efficiency Electricity and hydrogen Biofuels GasLight trucks Medium trucks Heavy trucks IEA.
184 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Before the pandemic, around a quarter of air passengers travel led for business purpose s, around half trave lled for leisure , and the remaining quarter travelled for essential personal reasons.
The expectation in the STEPS is that the lasting impacts of behaviour changes will be concentrated mostly on bu siness travel, which could be considerably reduced by companies and other organisations deciding to re-assess their business travel policies and replace some travel with video conferences.
Personal leisure travels are affected in the near term, but are assumed to gradually recover to pre -crisis levels.
In the STEPS, sustained decreases i n business passenger activity (10 % decline compared to what it would otherwise have been) reduce oil demand in 2030 by 0.2 mb/d.
However, if there were to be a wider turning away from air travel ( 25% decline in business travels, 10% in leisure travels – the wider aversion case in Figure 5.11 ), there would be an additional drop of around 0.8 mb/d in 2030.
In both business and leisure travel , short -haul and long -haul flights yield similar levels of reduction.
Figure 5.11 ⊳ Reduction in aviation oil demand due to behaviour changes Shifting to video conferences cuts oil demand by 0.2 mb/d in 2030; behaviour changes on a wider scale could reduce demand by an extra 0.
8 mb/d Despite these effects, oil demand in aviation increase s by 1.
2 mb/d between 2019 and 2030 in the STEPS, accounting for a quarter of total oil demand growth.
This is mainly driven by an increase in aviation activities in emerging market and developing economies and the limited alternative options.
Activity in emerging market and developing countries in Asia nearly doubles between 2019 and 2030, compared with 35% growth in Europe over the same period.
Low -carbon fuels, such as biofuels, are expected to enter the aviation market, but their blending share remains under 5% through to 2030.
Policy action might however change the picture: for example, the French government is urging Air France to commit to renewing its fleet with more efficient aircraft and sourcing 2% of its fuels from sustainable sources by 2025.
27% 49%24%Aviation activity by trip purpose in 2019 LeisureEssential visits - 1.0- 0.5STEPS Wider aversionmb/d Under 3 hours Over 3 hours Under 3 hours Over 3 hoursReduction in oil demand due to behaviour change in 2030 Business LeisureBusiness IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 185 5 How much can b ehaviou r change oil demand?
Traditionally, two drivers have played a main role in curbing oil demand across different transport modes: efficiency improvements and fuel switching (including switching to electricity, natural gas, biofuels and more recently hydrogen).
The Covid -19 pandemic has brought attention to an often -neglected third element: behaviour change.
Actions to contain the spread of the virus dragged down transport oil demand by 11% in 2020 compared to 2019.
However, there is a question mark over their longer term influence on oil demand.
How do the combined impacts of behaviour changes compare with the other two elements?
While the impact of behaviour changes in 2020 was dramatic, it is too soon to brace for a big decline in longer term oil demand across the different modes of transport on their account.
T ransport oil demand grows by 3.5 mb/ d over the period to 2030 in the STEPS.
Without improvements in fuel efficiency and fuel switching, growth would be around 18 mb/d in 2030.
Efficiency improvements and fuel switching limit oil demand growth to 2030 by some 10 mb/d a nd 4.5 mb/d respectively.
Increased teleworking, fewer business flights and delayed new car purchases further reduce oil demand by almost 1 mb/d in 2030.
However, some changes in behaviour such as shifting away from public transport to private cars and delaying the replacement of old cars actually push up oil demand, as do continued consumer preferences for SUVs, leading to a net demand increase of around 50 kb/d from behaviour changes in 2030 ( Figure 5.12 ).
Figure 5.12 ⊳ Drivers of changes in transport oil demand and impacts of behaviour changes in the Stated Policies Scenario Efficiency and fuel switching offset most of the increase due to activity growth; behaviour changes do not lead to a major reduction in demand in net terms.
Note: SUVisation refers to consumer preference for sport utility vehicles.
5 10 15 20 Growthmb/dChanges in demand by key driver, 2019 -2030 BehaviourFuel efficiency ActivityFuel switching -0.8-0.400.40.8mb/dBehaviour change i mpacts breakdown SUVisation Low fleet turnover Less public transport Fewer flightsTeleworking Deferred car salesNet changeSPOTLIGHT IEA.
186 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Policy measures and price signals however could prompt behaviour changes to make a much larger contribution to curbing oil demand (and emissions).
This topic is explored in detail in Chapter 4.
Shipping A significant deterioration in trade and industrial activities led to a drop in cargo volumes during the pandemic, and oil demand for shipping looks set to fall by around 7% in 2020.
In the STEPS, oil demand for shipping continue s to creep upwards to around 6 mb/d in 2030, albeit at a slower pace than in the WEO -2019 as seaborne trade is d epressed by lower economic outputs.
There is a marginal uptick in the use of high sul fur fuel oil over the next few years as more scrubbers are installed, but very low sul fur fuel oil remains the mainstay of marine fuels, with almost 50% market share in 2030.
While oil remains the dominant fuel, the use of alternative fuels increases rapidly from a low base: the share of LNG reaches 5% by 2030, and biofuels and hydrogen together account for 2.5% of the marine fuel mix.
Oil demand growth could be lower if po licies to scale up low -carbon fuels or efforts to shorten or localise supply chains are strengthened.
Petrochemicals The impact of the Covid -19 pandemic on demand for petrochemical products has varied by product type.
Demand for products used in packaging and medical applications (e.g.
LDPE) has been relatively robust; demand for those used in automotive, construction and manufacturing (e.g.
PVC) has been heavily affected.
5 Overall, oil demand for petrochemical feedstock in 2020 is expected to fall by 3% from 2019 levels.
The petrochemicals sector recovers fairly quickly from the crisis in the STEPS.
Oil demand for petroc hemical feedstock grows by 3 mb/d through to 2030, and by a further 1.5 mb/d to just over 17 mb/d in 2040.
The STEPS sees higher long -term demand than in the WEO2019 , reflecting an increased level of e -commerce that leads to more demand for packaging mate rials, as well as lower feedstock prices and excess capacity in the near term.
Petrochemicals cement its position as the largest driver of future oil demand growth, accounting for nearly 60% of total growth to 2030, and three -quarters to 2040.
Lighter prod ucts such as ethane, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and naphtha account for threequarters of the growth in total oil products in the period to 2030.
Growing societal and regulatory pressures to tackle plastic waste could act as a brake on the robust growth of petrochemicals.
While there have been some temporary setbacks in the fight against single -use plastic during the pandemic, the longer term case for action remain s unchanged.
R ecycled PET 6 was traded at a premium to virgin PET amid l ow oil prices, suggesting an undeterred appetite for recycled products, while infrastructure for 5 LDPE = low -density polyethylene; PVC = polymerizing vinyl chloride.
6 PET = polyethylene terephthalate.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 187 5 waste management and recycling featured in some of the stimulus packages that have been announced.
It is however likely to take more than this to make a strong dent in demand, not least because the items targeted for a ban on single -use plastics (e.g.
plasti c bags, straws and disposable cups ) do not represent a large volume of overall demand.
At the same time, average recycling collection rates increase only mod estly to around 20% by 2040 over 2019 levels in the STEPS, because the bulk of demand growth arises in emerging market and developing economies where recycling infrastructure is not yet widespread.
Measures to tackle plastic waste curb oil demand for petrochemicals by around 0.4 mb/d in 2030 compared to what it would otherwise have been.
If efforts to tackle plastic waste were to strengthen and spread, they could have large impacts in slowing oil demand growth.
In the SDS, for example, the collection rates for recycling rise much faster also in emerging market and developing economies, pushing up the average rate in 2040 to around 40% globally, double the rate envisaged in the STEPS.
This leads to oil demand for petrochemicals in 2030 being 0.9 mb/d (or 6%) lower than in the STEPS.
Successful uptake of chemical recycling technologies could also dampen crude oil demand by enabling a wider range of mixed and contaminated waste stream to be recycled .
Industry, buildings and power generation In industry, oil cont inues to lose competitiveness against natural gas, electricity and renewables.
As a result, demand for oil in industry remains flat at around 6 mb/d over the period to 2030, despite growing energy demand for industrial activities.
Oil demand for the buildi ngs sector falls across many advanced economies but sees modest growth in emerging markets with increased use for cooking in Africa, India and Southeast Asia, where LPG is increasingly used to replace inefficient and polluting stoves that use biomass for fuel.
Oil use in power generation declines by 30% to around 3 mb/d in 2030.
The Middle East accounts for almost 40% of global oil use for power generation, and lower gas prices are making it more attractive to use gas for domestic purposes to displace oil ( see Chapter 7).
Oil use for power generation in the Middle East in 2030 is lower by 0.4 mb/d in the STEPS than it was in the WEO -2019 as a result of this change and a weaker post -pandemic outlook for the economy.
5.3 Natural gas 5.3.1 Overview of natural gas demand trends Natural gas demand is expected to decline 3% in 2020, which would represent the largest annual fall in demand since it emerged as a major fuel in the 1930s .
Natural gas, however, has been more resilient to the immediate impact from the Covid -19 cris is than coal and oil.
Coal bore the brunt of the decline in electricity demand related to the pandemic and associated lockdowns, with generation expected to fall by 8% in 2020 compared to around 1% for gas.
Oil bore the brunt of the decline in the transport sector, which has experienced IEA.
188 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return the largest collapse in energy demand seen in any sector: gas plays very little part in transport.
Gas use in the buildings sector is generally more weather -dependent, and declines in commercial and public buildings have been marginally offset by higher residential consumption due to lockdowns.
Industrial gas demand is set to decline 4% in 2020, though fuel switching partially offsets what would otherwise have been a larger decrease.
The majority of natural gas demand growth over the next decade is expected to occur outside of advanced economies, especially in China, India, Southeast Asia and the Middle East, spurred by an oversupplied global gas market which has opened opportunities for price sensitive buyers (as explored further in Chapter 7).
However, gas faces significant uncertainty as these economies emerge from the Covid -19 crisis.
Despite a lower price outlook, growth prospects for gas continue to rely heavily on policy support in the form of air quality regulations or other restrictions on the use of more polluting fuels, and on significant investment in new gas infrastructure – around $70 billion each year in STEPS.
A weaker macroeconomic outlook could limit the capital available to major gas consumers, whether they are utilities facing lower electricity demand or export -oriented industrial manufacturers facing tough market conditions, making it more difficult to fund this infrastructure.
In more established markets, gas faces competition from increasingly costcompetitive renewables as well as environmental pressures .
Figure 5.13 ⊳ Change in natural gas demand by sector in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Gas demand in emerging market and developing economies bounces back quickly, while demand in mature markets barely recovers to pre- crisis levels Note s: Other includes natural gas use in energy transformation sectors and agriculture, and as a feedstock in industrial processes.
Buildings energy demand includes water desalination plants.
-50 0 50 100 150 200 250 bcm European Union United States Other advanced China Middle East India Southeast Asia Rest of worldeconomiesIndustry Power Buildings Transport Other IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 189 5 The macroeconomic shock induced by the Covid -19 pandemic results in a downwa rd revision of 2% to gas demand in the STEPS in 2030 compared to pre -crisis trajectories, implying that gas is more resilient than coal.
Overall gas demand is expected to recover quickly, reaching 4 600 bcm by the end of the decade, meaning that it is near ly 15% higher in 2030 than in 2019 .
Emerging market and developing economies lead the growth, while demand in more mature markets remains broadly static ( Figure 5.13) .
China and India account for around 45% of total gas demand growth over the next decade, with gas increasing its market share from a relatively low base.
Growth is also robust in the Middle East and Southeast Asia.
Some incremental gains for gas also occur in the United States, where low prices and low cost shale gas continue to favour a switch to natural gas in industry and power generation.
Despite some potential for growth as coal and nuclear capacity is retired, gas does not return to 2019 levels of demand in the European Union as renewables take up most of this market share.
European Union gas demand is 8% lower by 2030 than in 2019.
Power The steep drop in natural gas spot prices in the United States, European Union and Asia since 20 19 has increased gas's competitiveness against coal, especially in markets where changes in prices feed through smoothly to changes in the power mix.
There is also policy support in several countries for developing gas -fired power generation in place of co al or oil, particularly in Asia and the Middle East.
Together, these factors have led to around 80 bcm worth of switching to gas in the power sector over the course of 2018 -2020, a trend that continues in the STEPS: the majority of the net growth in gas demand in the power sector to 2025 is attributable to fuel switching (Figure 5.14 ).
Figure 5.14 ⊳ Drivers of change in natural gas demand in the power sector in the Stated Policies Scenario Fuel switching provides temporary support to gas demand in advanced economies; gains from growing electricity use elsewhere are partly offset by renewables and efficiency -100-50050100150bcm Activity Efficiency Fuel switching: Coal/oil to gas Gas to renewables/other Net change2019 -25 2025 -30 Advanced economiesEmerging and developing economiesEmerging and developing economiesAdvanced economies IEA.
190 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return However, the window for coal -to-gas switching rapidly closes in the 2020s, especially in the United States and the European Union, as slowing growth in electricity demand and expanding renewables narrow the space in which gas and coal compete for market share.
In the case of the European Union, these factors limit the opportunities for gas despite rising CO 2 prices and retiring coal and nuclear capacity.
The overall increase of gas use in the power sector across advanced economies is limited to around 25 bcm (or 3% of demand in 2019) through to 2025.
After 2025, increases in electricity generation from renewables gradually drive down gas demand in the power sector.
Gas -fired power plants remain important sources of flexibility in renewables -rich power systems over the longer term, even fewer volumes of gas are required in the power sector to fulfil these functions.
The picture is different in emerging market and developing economies, where rapid increases in electricity demand create more space for natural gas to expand.
However, while absolute volumes increase by nearly 100 bcm to 2030, gas ultimately captures less than a fifth of electricity generation growth in these economies over this period.
Despite lower gas prices, fuel costs for coal -fired power plants remain lower than those for gasfired power plants in emerging market and developing economies, and the growing competitiveness of solar PV and wi nd power in these economies prevents gas from gaining market share.
Industry Industry is responsible for the largest share of the increase in natural gas demand over the next decade; and gas use in industry is over a quarter high er than 2019 levels by 2030.
Nearly 95% of this growth arises in emerging market and developing economies, with China and India leading the pack ( Figure 5.15 ).
Gas demand in industry is sensitive to the macroeconomic outlook in these regions.
A more capital -constrained environment for small - and medium -scale manufacturers could undermine the case for investing in the infrastructure necessary to switch to natural gas; a slower than expected global recovery could reduce industrial demand in export -oriented sectors.
Although gas prices have become more attractive, oil prices are likewise low, and the price of imported gas is often contractually linked to that of oil; this weakens the economic case for switching to natural gas in industry.
Policy changes are also crucial to the outlook for industry: in China, for example, it is as yet unclear whether post -Covid stimulus measures will continue to favour coal -to-gas switching, or if the 14t h Five -Year Plan will step back from previous growth estimates for gas.
Nevertheless there is still plenty of scope for natural gas growth in the STEPS , particularly in light industries .
India is the main source of growth, and opportunities there are underpinned by the further development of gas networks which makes it possible to switch from oil to gas boilers for the supply of low -to medium -temperature heat.
There is also growth in mor e energy -intensive industrial sub- sectors such as chemicals, where gas is used as both a feedstock and a heat source in the production of ammonia for fertiliser and methanol: by 2030, demand is expected to increase by 80 bcm, with China, the United IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 191 5 States and the Middle East providing important growth markets.
Gas use for steel production could also grow, and is driven by gas -based direct reduced iron (DRI) processes in regions with abundant gas resources , such as in the United States .
Figure 5.15 ⊳ Change in natural gas demand in industry by key driver in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Industrial gas demand growth is largest in emergin g market and developing economies to 2030.
Fuel switching from coal and oil is responsible for nearly 30% of net growth Note s: Other dev.
Fuel switching includes cases where natural gas replaces other fuels (mainly coal and oil), as well as cases where other fuels replace natural gas (mainly renewables).
Other sectors Weather and efficiency policies have a larger influence on natural gas demand in the buildings sector than do low prices or macroeconomic conditions.
That said, the Covid -19 pandemic has sharply reduced gas demand in commercial buildings; it has also resulted in changing consumption patterns that may increase residential demand and partially offset this decline.
For example, an increase in gas use for residential heating is likely if continued outbreaks of the virus lead to further lockdowns or other restrictions during winter.
Increased levels of teleworking over the longer term may also increase residential demand, notably in economies with higher space heating requirements, while the risk of a prolonged economic downturn may lead households to continue using their existing boilers for longer, slowing declines in residential gas use in advanced economies (see Chapter 8).
Policies enacted in the coming years will have a major impact on gas demand in buildings.
The desire to maintain air quality improvements experienced during Covid -19 lockdowns may lead to a preference for gas rather than coal in emerging market and developing economies, and an expansion of existin g policies such as China's Clean Winter Heating Plan would extend the scope for such a preference to be exercised.
By contrast, gas use in buildings faces an uncertain future in mature markets where public perceptions of natural gas are changing and efforts to achieve decarbonisation objectives are accelerating.
- 20 0 20 40 60 80China India Other dev.
Asia Middle East North America Africa Europe OtherEfficiency Fuel switching Activity Net change bcm IEA.
192 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Restrictions on gas use in buildings as well as efficiency improvements and electrification trends see demand in advanced economies fall a further 25 bcm below 2019 levels by 2030 (Box 5.3).
There are increasingly ambitious policies in China, India and some European countries supporting the use of natural gas for transport (mainly LNG fuelled trucks and domestic shipping) .
However, the fall in oil prices and the signs that stimulus policies favour EV s have largely put the brakes on growth prospects for natural gas in transport.
Gas use in shipping offers modest potential for growth, with demand increasing to 45 bcm by 2040.
Box 5.3 ⊳ A cooler outlook for natural gas in buildings?
Natural gas use in the buildings sector accounted for 1 700 million tonnes (Mt) CO 2 emissions in 2019, which is 5% of the global total.
An increasing number of national , state or local governments are now implementing or announcing restrictions on natural gas connections in buildings in order to reduce CO 2 emissions.
Natural gas connections for new construction in the Netherlands have been prohibited since 2018, and connections in existing buildings are being removed as part of a drive to phase out natural gas use completely by 2050.
Gas use for heating in the United Kingdom is to be phased out in new buildings by 2025, while cities such as Leeds are taking steps to replace natural gas in networks with 100% hydrogen.
In the United States, and particularly in California, several cities have announced restrictions on natural gas use in new buildings, or plan to phase out gas use in buildings completely.
There is major uncertainty as to the impact the Covid -19 crisis will have on further adoption of restrictions on natural gas use, with several municipalities delaying decisions in recent months, and low gas prices reducing the economic case for electrification or efficiency improvements.
Nonetheless, further restrictions on gas use in state or national building codes are being proposed in some jurisdictions: in California, an all- electric building code has received the support of Pacific Gas and Electric, a major utility.
IEA analysis shows that switching from gas boilers to electric heat pumps for space heating would reduce CO 2 emissions for well over 90% of th e approximately 360 million homes using gas heating today, a share that rises to almost 100% of homes by 2030.
Coupling electrification with improved insulation in new buildings or retrofitting existing buildings would further reduce emissions.
In some cas es, however, full electrification of building energy use, and particularly heating, may be impractical or overly costly for consumers and power systems because of the scale of infrastructure investment required to balance peak loads with variable supply.
F ull electrification could also give rise to concerns about how to ensure the provision of critical heating services during power outages.
Alternative options for reducing CO 2 emissions from energy use in buildings include low -carbon gases (biomethane and hydrogen, which can make use of gas grids), as well as hybrid heat pumps, solar thermal and biomass.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energ y demand 193 5 Uncertainties af fecting the outlook for natural gas Uncertainties about demand are ultimately country and region specific, given the varied role that natural gas plays in different parts of the world ( Table 5.3).
The pandemic has brought into sharp relief the value of flexibility and responsiveness to su dden changes in energy demand – qualities which give natural gas, with ample spare capacity and storability across the supply chain, a comparative advantage.
Moreover, the collapse in prices from an oversupplied global gas market has opened opportunities for price sensitive Asian buyers in particular, and these opportunities have been enlarged by recent efforts to liberalise gas markets (e.g.
through India's gas exchange or China's new pipeline company).
Natural gas faces challenges, however.
Pricing signals in many countries are getting lost in contractual rigidities, insufficient infrastructure, and a gap between spot and oil -indexed pricing regimes.
The benefits of lower cost gas imports are also offset to a degree by concerns about import dependence and energy security, particularly where imported gas is used in place of domestically sourced coal or lignite.
In some mature markets such as northwest Europe and in some jurisdictions in the United States, natural gas is facing existential questions.
Althou gh short -term gains are still possible from coal -to-gas switching, the narrative that natural gas is a transition fuel is being seriously scrutinised in the context of pledges to reach net -zero emissions by midcentury.
There is also growing pressure to measure and reduce methane emissions.
Financial actors, such as the European Investment Bank, are scrutinising which parts of the gas value chain conform to tighter sustainable financing criteria, while EU policy makers are considering the future role of gas and its infrastructure in the European Green Deal.
Gas faces competitive pressures across a number of fronts, with renewables, efficiency and electrification of end -use demand all looming large.
In the STEPS, these factors mean that natural gas demand in advanced economies is nearly 50 bcm lower than it would otherwise have been by 2040, leaving demand essentially unchanged from 2019 levels.
In the SDS, however, this 50 bcm of avoided demand increases to nearly 900 bcm, leaving natura l gas demand more than 40% lower than in 2019.
Cities, countries and regions with aggressive greenhouse gas emissions targets are also increasingly differentiating between natural gas and gas transport infrastructure, and exploring ways to make use of the vast storage and flexibility potential of gas grids to help deliver decarbonisation objectives.
The case for maintaining this infrastructure in the longer term also rests on progress made in the deployment of CCUS as well as the integration of low -carbon g ases such as hydrogen and biomethane (discussed in Chapter 7).
In the European Union in particular, discussions centred on a hydrogen strategy are advancing, with as yet unclear implications for the gas value chain, while state -owned transmission system op erators are taking increasingly active steps to ensure that gas infrastructure finds a place in a net -zero landscape through initiatives such as the Hydrogen Backbone and the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas (ENTSOG) 2050 Roadmap.
194 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Table 5.3 ⊳ Key post-Covid uncertainties affecting natural gas demand Potential uncertainties by country/region Lower demand Higher demand United States • Increasing numbers of city, county or state restrictions on gas use in buildings.
• Stimulus measures focussed on improving building efficiency.
• A quicker rebound in oil production brings more low cost associated gas to market.
European Union • Full i mplementation of the European Green Deal and rapid progress towards carbon neutrality by 2050.
• Increased growth in low -carbon gases reduces need for natural gas.
• Slower pace of efficiency retrofits in buildings.
• Accelerated coal, lignite or nuclear phase out.
• Higher rates of home working (especially over winter).
India • Lower power demand and slower progress in downstream infrastructure development.
• Reduced subsidies to fertiliser industry.
• Lower uptake of compressed natural gas vehicles.
• Buyers are more able to lock in lower cost LNG.
• New policies in support of the stranded gas-fired fleet.
• Harmonised taxes and tariffs spur increased infrastructure investment, underpinned by a gas exchange better reflecting local supply and demand.
China • Cost -reflective power market liberalisation pushes gas from the merit order.
• Stimulus measures favouring coal production and consumption.
• Faster m arket reforms and expansion of regasification/midstream infrastructure.
• Further expansion of the Clean Winter Heating Plan.
• Accelerated uptake of LNG fuelled trucks.
Middle East • Less impetus to switch from oil to gas in power.
• Enhanced policy support to renewables (and coal).
• Slower roll out of gas -capture projects.
• Weaker outlook for integrated petrochemical projects.
• Faster diversification into non -associated gas supply.
• Greater embrace of cross -border infrastructure (e.g.
within the Gulf Cooperation Council countries ) and LNG imports.
• Continued subsidies for end- users.
• More robust oil price recovery.
Africa • Delays in commissioning export projects have knock -on effects on domestic growth.
• Lack of access to capital slows industrial development.
• Lower use of export capacity boosts domestic outlets for gas.
• Slower development of hydro/renewable projects.
Elsewhere • Lower GDP growth may hit demand and may delay construction of gas import and transmission infrastructure.
• More confidence to develop infrastructure to take advantage of prolonged market oversupply.
• The prospects of air quality improvements – made visible during Covid- 19 lockdowns – offer a bigger boost to gas over more polluting fuels.
• Lower gas prices spur more switching from coal and oil.
• Policy support for gas -based hydrogen pathways.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 195 5 5.4 Coal 5.4.1 Overview of coal demand trends Coal demand is estimated to drop by 7% in 2020 to levels not seen since 2009.
While coal demand has been wavering near a global peak since 2014, this drop in coal demand is likely to make it clear that 2014 was indeed the peak year for coal.
Small increase s from 2020 levels are likely as economies around the world recover from the pandemic, but coal demand is unlikely to pass 2019 levels again ( Figure 5.16) .
Coal demand from 2020 to 2030 in the STEPS is on average 8% lower than in pre -crisis projections, but coal remains the largest source of CO 2 emissions and is responsible for 38% of global CO 2 emissions between 2020 and 2030.
In the STEPS, emissions from coal are gradually reduced over time by policy actions that aim to promote renewables and reduce reliance on coal in power.
Industrial coal use is reduced in China and elsewhere.
Also, 13 Mt CO 2 (around 0.1%) from coal combustion are captured through CCUS in 2030, mainl y in the power sector.
However, the trajectory in the STEPS is very sensitive to the recovery pathway – which industries recover first and at what speed.
China is especially important in this context because it accounts for over 50% of global coal demand.
Figure 5.16 ⊳ Coal demand by sector, 2010-2030 There is no rebound back to pre -pandemic levels projected in STEPS for coal post -2020; current and announced policies keep its growth below its pre- crisis trajectory Note: Mtce = million tonnes of coal equivalent ; 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Power sector use accounts for nearly 65% of global coal demand.
After an expected 8% fall in 2020, coal use in power rebounds in the near term, driven by growth in emerging market and developing economies but is curbed by substantial and steady declines in advanced economies.
In 2030, advanced economies consume 50% less coal in the power sector than they did in 2019 as a result of market - and policy -driven retirements.
But an overall shift 1 0002 0003 0004 0005 0006 000 2010 2015 2020e 2025 2030Mtce PowerIndustryBuildingsOtherNon -energy usePre-crisis IEA.
196 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return everywhere towards sources of electricity like solar PV and wind eventually means that coal use in power in the STEPS never again reaches the pre -crisis level of 2018 and peaks before 2030 (see Chapter 6 for details on the electricity outlook by fuel).
End- use consumption accounts for nearly 40 % of total coal use in 2019.
After an estimated fall of 4% in 2020 , end -use consumption rebound s slightly in the STEPS before co ntinuing its pre -crisis decline after 2022 .
Industrial coal use accounts for the vast majority of coal consumption in end- use sectors.
It picks up slightly after 2020, only to shift to a downward trajectory by 2025, largely as a result of policy- driven changes in China.
Steel and cement production account for around 70% of industr ial coal end use in 2019, and see s only modest phase out in the STEPS in the coming decade, compared with a 1.8% annual decline in the SDS.
The buildings sector continues a steady decline of coal use over the coming years, backed by policies that focus on managing indoor and outdoor air quality .
coal-to-gas, coal -to-liquids ) and feedstock account for around 2% of global coal demand, and its future prospects largely depend on the content of China's forthcoming 14 th Five- Year Plan .
Global coal demand largely remains flat between 2020 and 2030 in the STEPS, but this conceals a wide variation in the outlook for coal in various regions (Figure 5.17 ).
United States and Europe see the largest relative and absolute declines in demand, while coal demand levels off in China thanks to efforts to drive down coal use, especially in its most populated provinces .
Coal demand continues to grow in emerging market and developing economies, even though natural gas brings about some near -term fuel switching in key markets in Asia and the Americas.
Growth is highest in India, which accounts for over 14% of global demand by 2030, up from around 11% in 2019 .
Figure 5.17 ⊳ Change in coal demand relative to 2019 by region in the Stated Policies Scenario The world sees a rebound in coal demand after 2020, before demand falls.
Europe and the United States lead the declines, and coal use in China peaks in the middle of the decade Note: Mtce = million tonnes of coal equivalent; 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
- 600- 400- 2000 200 2020e 2025 2030MtceRest of world Russia Southeast Asia India China Japan European Union United States Global net demand change from 2019 IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 197 5 Advanced economies In the United States, coal demand declines by over 200 million tonnes of coal equivalent (Mtce), between 2019 and 2030, over a 50% decline.
Coal's economic competitiveness continues to wane in the face natural gas prices and reductions in the levelised cost of electricity produced from solar PV and wind, as well as the use of carbon pricing in some states/regions.
Solar PV and wind are on track to provide more electricity than coal within a decade, although natural gas remains the main fuel used for power generation.
Industry accounts for less than 10% of total coal demand and remains stable in the 2019 -30 period in the United States.
In the European Union, coal demand declines by around 145 Mtce between 2019 and 2030— a decline of nearly 60% —as a result of power sector economics, coal phase -out policies and support policies for renewables.
The power sector accounts for nearly 90% of this decline, with the rest attributable to phasing out the residual use of coal in industry and buildings.
China Coal demand in China remains fairly stable over the 2019 -30 period in the STEPS, peaking near the middle of the decade, and ending the decade with a decline of around 85 Mtce (-3%).
The power sector adds around 45 Mtce to demand by 2030.
Nearly 6 0 Mtce come from fuel conversion (coal -to-gas and coal -to-liquids) and nearly 15 Mtce from chemical feedstock production.
This growth is offset by reductions in demand of around 50 Mtce in the buildings sector and nearly 110 Mtce in industry, particularly iron and steel production, driven by policies to phase out inefficient industrial boilers.
Electricity demand growth declines only slightly against pre -crisis projections over the coming decade, anticipating that China's economic recovery measures will quickly return the economy to pre -crisis growth patterns.
If China's stimulus plans focus on f ostering continued renewable growth, the power sector in China may see demand for coal fall sooner than current estimates of around 2025.
In this sector, as in the economy as a whole, much will depend on the detail of China's forthcoming 14th Five -Year Plan and how this might be shaped by China's new target of carbon neutrality by 2060.
There is some uncertainty about whether China's coal phase -out plans in end -use sectors might be relaxed in the short term in light of concerns around fuel security and the disruption of global supply chains during the pandemic.
Yet, low natural gas prices and continuing efforts to deregulate and boost strategic reserves during the low price period could strengthen the case for standing firm on coal -to-gas switching policies.
India and Southeast Asia India sees coal use climb by over 120 Mtce between 2019 and 2030 in the STEPS, accounting for 14% of world coal demand by 2030, second only to China.
Growth is roughly 50% from the p ower sector and 50% from industrial end use, with particularly large growth in the steel making sub -sector.
A more gradual economic rebound would decrease electricity demand growth and slow the expansion of industrial activity which uses coal.
198 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Southeast Asian coal demand increases by nearly 30% in the STEPS and by 2030 accounts for 6% of global coal demand.
This increase is largely driven by increased demand in the power sector, but around 25% is attributable to industrial production, particularly iron and steel.
As with India, a slower economic rebound would decrease growth in power sector demand: demand growth could also be jeopardised by waning public support for further investment in new coal facilities and by increased reluctance on the part of lenders to fund new coal -fired power plants.
Uncertaint ies affecting the outlook for coal The major uncertainties in the STEPS concern: the possibility of policies being delayed or rolled back, particularly in countries with large coal use; the trajectory of the economic recovery and of fuel diversification in India and other emerging economies in Asia; the prospects for new coal power plants in the face of public opposition and financing difficulties; and changes in the economics of fuel switching.
T hese uncertainties are detailed in Table 5.4 by country/region.
Table 5.4 ⊳ Key post-Covid uncertainties affecting coal demand Potential uncertainties by source Lower demand Higher demand European Union • Implementation of the European Green Deal makes the power sector move rapidly towards lower emissions generation.
• Rollback or lack of policies in key coal consuming countries such as Poland and Germany could slow the decline in coal.
India • Domestic economy is affected in the long -term with GDP revised down .
• Continue d heavy reliance on coal.
There is limited switching potential to gas or wind, with only s olar PV mak ing a contribution .
Coal use in industr y sector remain s strong .
China • More rapid action to phase out coal.
• Expansion of Clean Winter Heating Plan.
• Industrial end- use sectors demand rises as a result of stimulus measures.
• Steel and cement production revised up.
• Policies to preserve the role of coal in power g eneration and chemical conversion (coal- to-gas and liquids).
Other Asia • Further downward revisions of regional GDP .
• Phase out of inefficient coal plants in Japan.
• Higher natural gas prices lift pressure on coal use in power.
• If natural gas prices rise, importing regions with coal phase -out plans may slow fuel switching to avoid price spikes.
United States • Continued low natural gas and renewable prices squeezing out more coal.
• State support to CCUS provide s a lifeline for coal.
Elsewhere • Coal is a swing producer in the power merit order and is out -competed by natural gas .
• Low GDP growth impacts coal demand in end- use sectors .
• Local push back on new coal plants for environmental reasons.
• Regions with low electricity demand growth may delay new generation projects, keeping existing coal- fired plants online for longer.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 199 5 China in particular is central to uncertainties affecting future coal demand because it accounts for 56% of global coal use in 2030.
China has been progressively phasing out coal in recent years, but concerns about dependence on oil and gas imports or about employment could lead to a slowing of phase -out plans.
Conversely, concerns about emissions or air quality could speed them up.
Nearly 130 GW of coal -fired capacity was under construction worldwide at the start of 2020, with several times that amount at some stage of planning: a depressed outlook for electricity could affect the pace of new construction.
Many new coal -fired power projects are highly dependent on the financing terms available.
Alternative investment options that offer better financing terms could shift investment decisions, especially if development banks offer favourable terms for low -carbon emissions alternatives.
Natural gas price uncertainty and fuel switching will have a strong influence on coal phaseout trajectories in the United S tates and Canada, and to a lesser extent, the Europe an Union and United Kingdom.
The role of price dynamics in fuel switching and hedging decisions is important (see section 5.3 for further discussion).
5.5 Nuclear Nuclear power provides around 10% of global electricity supply and is the second -largest low emissions source after hydropower.
The fall in electricity demand resulting from the Covid -19 pandemic looks set to lead to a fall in nuclear output of 125 terawatt -hours ( TWh ) in 2020, with demand returning to pre -crisis levels in 202 4.
Global nuclear power output rises by around 1 0% from 20 19 to 2030 , but its share of electricity production declines slightly and two divergent regional trends become apparent (see Chapter 6 ).
In emerging market and developing economies, nuclear power output increases by over 60% from 2019 to 2030.
With 49 nuclear power reactors in operation and 11 under construction, China has the largest fleet of nuclear reactors in the world in 2030.
There are also programmes underway to expa nd nuclear power in Russia, India and the Middle East.
In contrast, output in advanced economies is set to fall by 10% from 2019 to 2030.
Despite lifetime extensions and the completion of a few new projects, nuclear power capacity declines by 20% in the European Union by 2030 and by 10% in the United States .
5.6 Renewables In 2010, the power sector accounted for around 50% of all renewable primary energy use, largely in the form of hydro.
End- use sectors accounted for the other 50%, in the form of modern biomass, solar thermal water heating and geothermal.
7 In 2019 the split is roughly 60% power and 40% modern end- use renewables.
Renewables to generate electricity have grown significantly due to the rapid expansion of wind and solar PV, while the direct use of 7 Excludes traditional use of biomass.
See Box 5.4 for further explanation of why traditional use of biomass is excluded from renewable energy accounting.
200 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return renewables in end -use sectors has remained slower but steady , growing at a pace that is 20 times slower than that of wind and solar PV used for power generation .
The Covid -1 9 crisis is set to dampen the pace of renewables growth only momentarily in 2020, due to temporary project delays and supply chain disruptions, before returning to rapid growth thereafter.
Solar PV and wind power rise to the same levels or surpass precrisis projections in 2030, driven upward by increased policy support.
End -u se renewables are set for a small dip in 2020 before returning to growth in 2021, brought back up as transport activity rebounds, driving up demand for oil and biofuels with it.
Over the coming decade, wind and solar grow by 10% year -on-year and end -use renewables b y 4%.
The focus in this section is on end -use renewables (trends in renewable electricity are discussed in Chapter 6).
Modern bioenergy accounts for the lion's share of growth in end -use renewables through to 2030 in the STEPS (Figure 5.18 ).
This growth comes largely from the use of biofuels in transport, in particular from its increase in blended fuels in the United States, China and the European Union, as well as new growth coming to emerging market and developing economies.
While these projections could be dampened as a result of the economic damage done by the pandemic, demand for biofuels could also rise further if measures in economic recovery plans provide additional support.
Biogas and modern biomass for heating also see over double the growth in demand by 2030, driven by growth in industry.
Figure 5.18 ⊳ Renewable energy demand by source and sector in the Stated Policies Scenario After a slowdown in 2020, rapid wind and solar growth resumes through to 2030; biofuels also grow rapidly although not as fast as power sector renewables Note s: 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
Indirect renewable use indicates the share of renewables -based electricity or district heat demand in end -uses.
The indirect renewable bars attribute the share of renewable energy from the power system to those end -uses, and therefore should not be taken as addi tive to the renew able electricity shown in the electricity sector bar chart.
4 0008 00012 00016 000 2019 2020e 2030TWh Bioenergy Hydro Wind Solar Geothermal IndirectElectricity Share in total demand (right axis)10%20%30%40% 200 400 600 800 2019 2020e 2030 2019 2020e 2030MtoeHeat Transport IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 201 5 The electrification of transport and heat is also indirectly increasing demand for renewables in end -use sectors.
Cost declines for EVs and heat pumps continue to drive the market upward over the next decade alongside strong supporting policies.
Sales of EVs in particular fare better than internal combustion engine vehicles, since they appeal to wealthier market segments less a ffected by the crisis.
Solar thermal growth slows in the decade ahead, primarily due to a slowdown in China, where rural areas that were the primary market for solar water heating increasingly gain access to other water heating options.
Nevertheless, by 2030, solar hot water heating supplies 1.6 -times the total primary energy than it did in 2019.
Box 5.4 ⊳ Traditional use of biomass: the unsustainable use of bioenergy Solid biomass remains the primary source of energy, mainly for cooking, in some emerging market and developing economies.
Traditional biomass use is unsustainable and burning it in inefficient cook stoves produces high levels of indoor air pollution.
In sub-Saharan Africa, 80% of households rely on the traditional use of biomass to meet their daily cooking needs.
Worldwide, currently around 2.5 million premature deaths per year are attributable to air pollution from the traditional use of biomass.
Figure 5.19 ⊳ Population without access to clean cooking and traditional use of biomass in residential demand in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019 and 2030 By 2030, 2.4 billion people still lack access to clean cooking with only small declines in the role of traditional biomass in residential energy demand Sources: IEA analysis; World Health Organization Household Energy Database (WHO, 2016).
If counted with other kinds of bioenergy, the traditional use of biomass would account for one -third of all bioenergy demand in 2030 and around 2.3 billion people are still dependent on the traditional use of biomass to meet household energy needs 5%10%15%20%25%30% 5001 0001 5002 0002 5003 000 2019 2030Million peopleRest of world Rest of Asia China India Sub-Saharan Africa Share of traditional use of biomass in global residential demand (right axis) IEA.
202 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return (Figure 5.19 ).
The global population without access to clean cooking has declined over recent decades reflecting efforts to reduce the reliance of vulner able populations on the traditional use of biomass with the aim to improve indoor air quality, reduc e the amount of time spent gathering fuel and curb defores tation.
Progress has been uneven, however, and the population without access to clean cooking has continued to increase in Africa.
Moreover, modest advances have been set back for the time being by the pandemic.
While some countries have implemented policies to counter this trend , regions like s ub-Saharan Africa look set continue to see increases in th e number of people that rely on the traditional use of biomass in the short term (see Chapter 3 where the affordability risk and its impact on progress made in access to energy is discussed).
5.6.1 Renewables demand by sector Power Unlike other sources of electricity, the growth of renewable electricity in the STEPS is largely unchanged from pre -crisis projections and averages about 5% per year from 2019 to 2030.
Supportive policies exist for renewables in 166 countries , which along with falling technology costs drive this robust growth.
Increasing policy ambitions to expand renewable electricity are only slightly moderated by lower electricity demand growth over the next decade than in pre -crisis projections, especially where policie s target a specific share of renewables in an electricity or energy mix.
Prospects for solar PV, in particular, have improved despite the crisis, thanks to policy support and its status as the cheapest source of new electricity generation in most parts of the world.
Wind power has maintained its growth prospects, with technology gains and cost reductions set to help offshore wind make a bigger contribution (IEA, 2019c ).
Unlike utility -scale solar PV, which sees only a small drop in growth rate in 2020, distributed PV deployment sees a significant slowdown in growth in 2020, in large part because the disposable income of consumers is affected by the economic impact of the pandemic.
These growth rates remain below pre -pandemic projections, but by the end of t he decade growth rates firm to prior trajectories.
(Power sector renewables trends are discussed at length in Chapter 6.)
Transport Biofuels in transport see continued strong growth of 5% per year for the next decade in the STEPS.
The major markets for growth are the United States, China and Europe.
In the United States, extension of the Renewable Fuel Standard after 2022 requires roll out of higher blending fuels, such as E15 and E85 8, which is dependent on the wider adoption of these fuels at gas stations and through distributors .
The European Union sees continued growth , fostered by the Renewable Energy Directive target of a 14% share of renewables in 8 E15 (E85) is gasoline blended with up to 15% (85%) of ethanol in volume.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 203 5 the transport sector by 2030 .
Rising electrification of the vehicle fleet also enables renewable electric ity use in transport to increase two -and-half- times from 2019 to 2030 in the STEPS, led by China and the European Union.
In 2030, renewables -based electricity accounts for 13% of renewable use in transport.
The importance of biofuels rises in emerging market and developing economies, which account for over 40% of the growth in the 2020 -30 period, especially where biofuel production also supports agricultural policy aims.
India has had a 5% ethanol blending target nationally since 2008, and achieved it for the first time in 2017.
India has adopted a more ambitious target since then of 20% for 2030, which even if not attained by 2030, is projected to increase biofuel use in India.
Indonesia and Brazil both see continued growth and have vehicles and infrastructure able to handle higher blends: biofuels also support agricultural policy and energy security aims.
Heat The use of renewables for heat applies to space and water heating, cooking, industrial processes and other uses.
It can be provided directly by bioenergy, solar thermal, geothermal or indirectly through electricity and district heat produced from renewable sources.
In 2019, renewables accounted for 10% of total energy consumed for heating worldwide.
By 2030, this increases to 14% in the STEPS.
Modern bioenergy is responsible for nearly 40% of the growth in renewable heating by 2030, and electricity powered by renewables for roughly 30%.
Figure 5.20 ⊳ Renewable heat in industry and buildings in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019 and 2030 Increased use of bioenergy and renewables -based electrification increase renewable heating by over 40% in 2030 Note: Indirect renewable use indicates the share of renewables -based electricity or district heat demand in end-uses.
The indirect renewable bars attribute the share of renewable energy from the power system to those end -uses, and therefore should not be taken as additive to the renewable s in the power sector .
5%10%15%20% 100 200 300 400 2019 2030 2019 2030Mtoe Bioenergy Solar Geothermal Electricity Indirect Renewable share of total (right axis)Industry Buildings IEA.
204 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return In industry, most growth in renewable heating in the STEPS is met by modern bioenergy (Figure 5.20) , largely in the form of biogas, which is suitable for high heat processes and can be blended into natural gas networks.
This growth is largely driven by policy action, particularly in China and the European Union, and in particular by renewable portfolio standards, emissions reductions targets, fossil fuel reduction targets and caps.
Industrial policy that drives increased blending of biomethane into natural gas networks helps increase the share of bioenergy in district heating systems and in the buildings sector.
The electrification of low -grad e heating in industry nearly doubles by 2030, but still only accounts for around 15% of total renewable heating in industry.
In the SDS, electrification of low -grade heat in industry plays a much larger role in the growth of renewable heating in industry, rising to over 40% above the level in the STEPS.
In emerging market and developing economies, low -grade industrial heat is often provided by solid biomass or biomass by -products, sometimes through the use of highly inefficient boilers.
The use of biomass in emerging market and developing economies is expected to maintain its share of the heat market as rural industries grow, although with some fuel switching to modern bioenergy and more to natural gas and LPG.
In buildings, increases in the use of renewab le heat to 2030 in the STEPS largely come about through the electrification of heating needs (35%) and through more use of bioenergy (about 30%) and solar thermal (about 25%).
The electrification of heating in buildings is driven by policies and programmes that provide incentives to replace fossil fuel boilers with heat pumps, or regulations requiring the use of heat pumps or other clean heating technologies in new construction.
In China, the Clean Winter Heating Plan encourages switching from coal to elect ric heat pumps.
The use of natural gas for heating is facing bans in new buildings in advanced economies such as the United Kingdom and the Netherlands (see Box 5.3).
Increases in the use of modern bioenergy are driven by wider uptake of improved cookstoves, including clean burning stoves using biocharcoal or biomass briquettes to replace traditional biomass helping 100 million people gaining access to clean cooking by 2030.
The use of biogas in buildings grows at 5% per year through the 2020s, largely due to the blending of biogas into existing natural gas networks: Europe in particular expands blending requirements for biomethane and develops some dedicated "green gas" options.
Use of bioenergy in district heating systems grows slightly in the STEPS, with most of the fuel switching focussed on replacing coal with gas, especially in China.
Solar water heaters and geothermal heating provide around 4% of total heating demand in residential buildings in 2019 , which in the STEPS increases to nearly 6% in 2030, with solar water heating rising by 5% annually and geothermal by 4%.
Within many emerging market and developing economies, increased access to other means for water heating may slow the deployment of solar hot water in rural areas from historic rates witho ut policies supporting its deployment.
Experience in China to use solar hot water to provide energy services and pairing it with the deployment of clean water systems could be instructive for emerging market and developing countries.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 205 5 Uncertainties affecting the outlook for end- use renewables In the STEPS, faster growth for end- use renewables depends to a large extent on further policy action at a time of economic difficulty and competing budgetary pressures.
There is also a risk that some existing targets may not be enforced or that implementation dates may be delayed as a result of pressures arising from the Covid -19 pandemic.
Supportive policies may however play a big role in recovery packages, especially for transport biofuels on the basis that it would provide support for agricultural production as well as emissions reductions.
Table 5.5 looks at the uncertainties in both directions in more detail.
Table 5.5 ⊳ Key post-Covid uncertainties affecting modern end-use renewables Potential uncertainties by source Lower demand Higher demand Industry: bioenergy • Lower activity with economic downturn would reduce total consumption.
• Blending mandates and industrial decarbonisation targets may be relaxed in the short term to avoid cost penalties to sensitive industries.
• Targets for blending may not be achieved in China and the E uropean Union.
• Implementation of new biomethane blending requirements as a part of green stimulus packages.
Transport: bioenergy • Lower mobility activity reduces demand in the short term .
• Delays in meeting targets in China, European Union, India and United States.
• Agricultural policy support could be reinforced, especially if global trade remains low .
Buildings: bioenergy • Biomethane blending mandates and buildings decarbonisation targets may be relaxed in the short term to avoid imposing costs on users.
• Slower uptake of improved cook stoves.
• Implementation of new biomethane blending requirements as a part of green stimulus packages.
• Additional incentives to switch to clean heating as part of stimulus packages.
Solar thermal • Strain on consumer spending reduces independent deployment.
• Delayed deployment of gas networks may encourage wider uptake of solar thermal water heating.
• Solar thermal may receive policy support in emerging/developing economies.
Geothermal • Strain on consumer spending reduces deployment .
• May be included in renewable and efficiency stimulus packages .
End-use electrification • Lower electrification of buildings and industry under low natural gas prices .
• Policies supporting EVs boost renewables -based electricity and depress oil demand.
206 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return 5.7 Energy efficiency Consumers are spending less and postponing purchases of new energy -consuming goods and businesses are reticent to make non -core business investment amid so much uncertainty in the time of the Covid -19 pandemic.
This has negative implications for improving energy efficiency in areas such as new vehicles and appliances, retrofits and new construction, and industrial processes.
But as economies rebound, these purchases pick up, bringing associated energy efficiency gains.
In the STEPS, this slowdown from 2020 -3 0 represents an average 10% reduction in energy savings relative to WEO -2 019 projections (Figure 5.2 1).
Still, accumulated energy efficiency savings over the decade save nearly 1 100 Mtoe globally, slightly more than China's annual industrial energy consu mption.
Figure 5.21 ⊳ Annual additions to energy efficiency savings in the Stated Policies Scenario and pre-crisis trajectories Global energy efficiency savings slow relative to achievements in the last decade and to pre -pandemic projections for the coming decade Note: The comparison in global savings for 20 19-2030 is between the Stated Policies Scenario projections in the World Energy Outloo k-2019 and the Stated Policies Scenario in this 2020 Outlook .
Despite the pandemic -related slowdown, most major regions are set to save more energy on an annual basis in the 20 19-30 period than they did in the previous decade, a trend that is consistent w ith previous projections.
The notable exception is China, where average annual additional energy efficiency savings over the 2019- 30 period are projected to be around half that of the previous decade.
This slowdown is the result of China already having upg raded the efficiency of a large number of inefficient manufacturing and production facilities, allowing it to rapidly improve its industrial efficiency in a way that will be difficult to replicate in the coming decade.
China is still projected to have the largest energy efficiency savings in the coming decade, which offsets over 40% of expected energy consumption growth.
10 20 30 40 50 60 United StatesEuropean UnionChina India Southeast AsiaAfricaMtoe 2010-19 STEPSRegional savings 20 40 60 80 100 120 2010-19 2019-30Mtoe Pre-crisisGlobal savings 2019 -30: IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 207 5 Energy intensity improvements These pandemic -related efficiency setbacks lead to a slower rate of improvement in energy intensity, the p rimary indicator for how the world is progressing its use of energy to produce GDP (Figure 5.22 ).
As economies get back on track, energy intensity improvements revive, driven by increases in energy efficiency and structural changes in the economy.
In the STEPS, energy intensity improveme nts average 2.0% per year over 2019 -25, and 2.2% per year in the second -half of the decade.
However, this rate of improvement is lower than the 2.4% projected in the WEO -2019 for 2025 -30, and is well below the 3 -4% improvements required to meet the SDG 7.3 target and the objective championed by governments in the Three Percent Club.9 Figure 5.22 ⊳ Energy intensity improvements and trajectories Energy intensity improvements are delayed, but as the economy revives, some of these losses are recovered, although still lagging pre -pandemic projections and target levels All regions contribute to energy intensity improvements in the coming decade.
As w as the case in the last decade, China delivers one of the largest year -on-year improvements in energy intensity at 2.8%, despite a sizeable slowdown from last decade's rate of efficiency gains.
These improvements arise from heavy industry playing a less prominent role in China's economic growth in the coming decade.
China ends the decade close to the global average for energy intensity.
Europe also delivers high year -on-year improvements, at 2.3% annually, and India improves 2.1% annually .
Advanced econom ies see average improvement rates of around 2%, while improvements in emerging market and developing economies average around 2.4%.
9 SDG 7.3 is the UN S ustainable Development Goal to double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency by 2030.
The Three Percent Club is a collaboration of governments and supporting organisations committed to putting the world on a path to 3% annual efficiency improvement.
For each year that the 3% target is not met, it means targets must be revised upward in order to meet the SDG 7.3.
-4%-3%-2%-1% 2010-19 2019-25 2025-30Average energy intensity rate 0.070.080.090.100.11 2019 2025 2030toe per $1000, PPPTrajectories STEPS SDG7 targetPre-crisis IEA.
208 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return 5.7.1 Energy efficiency by sector The pandemic -related efficiency slowdown is felt across all end -use sectors in the early 2020s, but as the decade progresses, annual efficiency savings gradually return to pre -crisis trajectories.
Still, over the course of the decade, efficiency savings are some 1 0% lower than pre -pandemic projections.
Unrelated to the pandemic -related slowdown, there was already a big shift in where efficiency comes from underway.
Last decade, industry was the workhorse for delivering efficiency savings.
In the period to 2030, average annual additional efficiency savings in industry are around 45% less than in the last decade.
On the other hand, annual efficiency savings in passenger cars and buildings are set to increase slightly compared to last decade , consistent with pre -crisis projections (Figure 5.23) .
This reflects existing policies having continued impact on new equipment, appliances, cars, and buildings, as well as broader coverage of building codes and vehicle efficiency standards, and by increased consumer uptake of more efficient vehicles.
Figure 5.23 ⊳ Average annual change in energy consumption and avoided demand due to efficiency improvements by sector in the Stated Policies Scenario Efficiency slow s from historic rates in industry, with buildings and road transport seeing gains over last decade 's levels due to increased policy action In transport, final energy consumption growth from 201 9-30 would have been nearly 120% higher without efficiency improvements in road transport in the STEPS.
This is larger than the efficiency savings in road transport in the last decade, when demand would have been 70% higher without efficiency.
This is driven by large improvements in fuel efficiency, especially from electric drive trains, which percolate into the fleet as consumers purchase new vehicles.
These proje cted savings in 2019 -30 are less than pre -crisis projections, with light -duty passenger vehicle sales almost 10% lower in the STEPS.
The downturn in 20 40 60 80 100 2010-19 2019-30 2010-19 2019-30 2010-19 2019-30Mtoe Annual change Avoided demandIndustry Buildings Transport IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook f or energy demand 209 5 transport sector energy efficiency improvements also is exacerbated by the rollback of the US Corporate Ave rage Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards.
In aviation, less use and early retirements of wide -bodied, four -engine aircraft, lead to fleet efficiency improvements.
rail and shipping, stock turnover takes place on much longer timesca les, and the crisis does not result in material changes in efficiency levels.
Counter to slowing efficiency gains, the pandemic and its economic aftermath lowers transport activity, and slows growth in total primary energy demand along with it, especially in the near term.
This offsets the slowdown in efficiency and results in energy demand for transport ending the decade just below 2030 levels in pre -crisis projections .
In buildings , efficiency savings increase in the coming decade, which was also the case in pre-crisis projections, although the pick -up is less marked than in pre -crisis projections due to the economic slowdown.
Buildings energy demand growth would have been 80% higher in the 2019 -30 period without efficiency in the STEPS compared with a lit tle over 70% in the 2010- 19 period.
Th e increase reflects existing policies covering new stock, especially in advanced economies, as well as more countries adopting energy efficient building codes and mandates .
These new codes are coupled with a large increase in building energy demand in emerging market and developing economies, which drives up total efficiency savings as well.
However these gains are dragged down due to slower appliance turnover, with sales down around 10% over the 2020- 30 period against pre -crisis projections due to the economic strains on consumers.
Some purchases are also less efficient, especially in emerging market and developing economies, where consumers and businesses tend to be more sensitive to upfront c osts.
Energy efficiency retrofits in buildings also slow in many markets in the years immediately following the pandemic, but investment in retrofits for both residential and services buildings climb above historic rates by the middle of the decade thanks to recent policies supporting retrofits in Europe, Japan, Korea and China, some as part of economic stimulus packages.
In many emerging market and developing economies, efficiency is driven by new buildings being more efficient than a benchmark, though de pressed levels of new construction slows efficiency gains until demand for new housing revives.
Residential efficiency was previously projected to play a larger role this decade, but the pandemic's impact on consumer spending softens that projection.
Industrial efficiency slows the most compared to historic rates in the STEPS, though this is not an effect of the crisis, which only slightly suppresses efficiency gains relative to previous projections.
Industrial energy demand growth would have been almost 190% higher from 2010- 19 without industrial energy efficiency in the STEPS.
On the other hand, removing industrial efficiency in the period to 2030 would only result in 90% higher demand growth.
This slowdown is notable in China, where industrial efficiency gains slow after years of rapid progress in which inefficient plants were replaced with top -of-the-line facilities and production was consolidated among the most efficiency plants.
The crisis -related global slowdown in efficiency, however, is concentrated in light industry, where small to mediumsize enterprises have an influential role and are expected to decrease spending on IEA.
210 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return efficiency upgrades in order to weather economic difficulties.
Furthermore, lower fuel prices may extend efficiency payback periods, and further disincentivise industry action (Box 5.5).
Conversely, industrial energy efficiency in heavy industry actually improves compared with pre -crisis projecti ons during the 2020 -30 period.
This is largely due to the earlier phase out of inefficient production lines in heavy industry, accelerated by the pandemic where low demand drives consolidation under new industrial policy in some economies.
However, these efficiency gains in heavy industry are just shy in offsetting the slower improvements in light industry.
Box 5.5 ⊳ Payback periods for investment in efficiency measures are affected by energy prices Low fuel prices have a profound impact on efficiency deployment.
Under the current low prices, payback periods for key efficiency measures will be extended by 10 -40%, bringing down the appetite for certain actions (Figu re 5.24 ).
While individuals may have other motivations beyond savings for retrofits or purchasing efficient appliances and cars, the services and industrial sectors are much more price consc ious, and will see more pronounced slowdowns in efficiency while prices are low.
Many companies, especially under current economic duress, find it challenging to justify efficiency measures where payback periods are more than three years, especially if the y have internal hurdle rates and do not own the buildings in which they operate.
Figure 5.24 ⊳ Changes in average payback period for key efficiency measures with low fossil fuel prices Payback periods extend between 10 -40% with low fossil fuel prices in the medium term, slowing efficient stock turnover and electrification Note: BEVs = battery electric vehicles.
Energy service companies, who may be willing to take on longer payback projects, will also find fewer projects that meet return on investment requirements.
This is because 15%30%45% 5 10 15 Solar thermalPassenger BEVsHeat pumpsPassenger HybridsElectric motorsEfficient trucksYearsPayback increase Pre-crisis payback Percentage change (right axis) IEA.
Chapter 5 | Outlook for energy demand 211 5 many employ shared -savings models, where their revenues are based on how much they r educe end -customer energy bills.
Under low natural gas prices, standard envelope and fuel switching measures will deliver lower savings.
This may shift the market away from retrofits and fuel switching in the short term and towards improving efficiency in electrical equipment, for which payback periods have remained stable along with electricity prices.
For example, electric industrial motors see an increase in the payback period of around 10%, as opposed to the payback for the average household to switch to a heat pump, which increases by around 40%.
For transport, low oil prices make the payback on efficient, EVs and hybrid electric vehicles 10 -30% longer.
While payback alone does not reflect the myriad reasons that motivate efficient car purchases, it could result in slower adoption in price sensitive market segments, including fleet owners.
These changes in payback may in turn influence subsequent policy designs during the recovery, where policy makers may adjust subsidy levels or electricity and gas r ate structures to continue advancing goals for emissions reductions or electrification of end-uses.
Uncertainties affecting the outlook for efficiency More than any "fuel", energy efficiency improvements are highly dependent on the trajectory of economic recovery, with higher incomes and revenues both accelerating the deployment of more efficient stock and increasing access to critical energy services.
Any boost in the speed of economic recovery would improve projections for energy efficiency gains, and any slowing of economic recovery would damage them.
Policy responses could play a key role in preventing a slowdown in efficiency gains.
Efficiency measures already feature prominently in recovery packages in the European Union, United Kingdom, Korea and China, and may well be included in others in the coming months, given its potential to decrease customer energy bills, reduce emissions and create employment.
Efficiency programmes in the US recovery initiatives after the 2008 -09 economic crisis demonstrated substantial job creation, a finding corroborated by analysis in the recent Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report (IEA, 2020 a).
It is also possible that additional mandatory building performance standards may be put in place, as they already have been in t he Netherlands, France and the U nited Kingdom; the US state of Washington; and in Tokyo , New York City, Washington DC and St. Louis , Missouri .
Efficiency mandates would mitigate many of the uncertainties that hinder wider uptake of en ergy efficiency measures.
In particular, mandates could eliminate the most inefficient models and help to drive price reductions in more efficient appliances and equipment.
Subsidies may be re- evaluated in emerging market and developing economies where governments are trying to mitigate long -term risks of energy poverty, and they also could increase efficiency improvements above the levels in the STEPS projections.
Table 5.6 highlights the key uncertainties for energy efficiency.
212 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Table 5.6 ⊳ Key post-Covid uncertainties affecting efficiency Potential uncertainties by source Lower efficiency Higher efficiency Unemployment and decreased consumer spending • Pandemic situation is protracted; more workers are laid off; government budgets cannot provide financial relief at levels to boost consumer spending confidence with adverse impacts on turnover of energy- consuming devices and equipment.
• Social safety nets and/or stimulus packages are effective in maintaining levels of consumer spending on new equipment, cars and appliances.
• Well -designed incentives and/or efficien cy mandates stimulate consumer purchases of energy efficient options rather than lowupfront cost inefficient options.
• Fewer SUVs are purchased due to high upfront costs, and consumers buy smaller cars out of necessity.
Business and industry • Stimulus efforts to keep all industries afloat means many operate at suboptimal output levels with lower efficiencies.
• Reduced demand delays construction of planned industrial plants with more efficient technologies .
• Inefficient vehicles in corporate fle ets (e.g.
airplanes, delivery vehicles) are retired from inventory during low demand to reduce operating costs.
• Least efficient industrial production units are closed.
Stimulus packages impact on energy efficiency • Policies may create demand for all industries, and keep inefficient production afloat for longer than without government support.
• Stimulus includes energy efficiency mandates, funds program mes or incentives .
• Financial aid is conditioned to require lower emissions and improved energy intensity.
Survival of energy efficiency programmes • Utility operated energy efficiency programmes are under cut by increasing levels of non -payment .
• Energy service companies, funded through shared- savings models, see reductions in revenues and possibly default s, starving the market of providers .
• Appliance and car manufacturers; struggl e with low purchases; curtail energy efficiency R&D; push to postpone compliance with efficiency mandates; focus on selling ineffic ient backlog.
• Stimulus program mes keep energy service companies alive and able to deliver.
• When consumer and business spending revives, more efficient models are available or new regulations are in play, causing new purchases to "skip a generation".
Fuel prices • Low prices remain and slow uptake of more efficient equipment and appliances.
• Governments use the opportunity of low fossil fuel prices to reform fossil fuel subsidies.
• Carbon taxes introduced or strengthened.
Behaviour change • Shift to personal vehicles from public transport modes.
• Workplace distancing measures and safety protocols hit productivity, lowering GDP while keeping energy consumption relatively flat .
• Teleworking becomes standard, reducing transport activity, while producing the same amount of GDP .
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 213 Chapter 6 Outlook for electricity A new path is lit ?
• The Covid -19 crisis has underlined the importance of a reliable, affordable and secure electricity supply that is able to accommodate sudden changes in behaviour and economic activity while continuing to support vital health and information services.
The electricity sector will play a key role in supporting economic recovery, and an increasingly important long -term role in providing the energy that the world needs.
Over time it looks set to evolve into a system with lower CO 2 emissions, a stronger infrastructure base and enhanced flexibility .
• In the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) , global electricity demand recovers and surpasses pre -Covid -19 levels in 2021.
Electricity demand growth is fastest in India to 2030, after which growth is most pronounced in Southeast Asia and Africa (Figure 6.1).
Electricity demand growth globally outpaces all other fuels .
Electricity meets 21% of global final energy consumption by 2030 .
Figure 6.1 ⊳ Electricity outlook in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Electricity demand increases in emerging market and developing economies, solar PV takes off and power sector CO 2 emissions never return to pre- crisis levels • In advanced economies, electricity demand recovers to pre -crisis levels by 2023 and then rises by 0.8 % per year through to 2030 , driven by the electrification of mobility and heat.
In developing market and eme rging economies, rising levels of ownership of household appliances and air conditioners, together with increasing consumption of goods and services , underpin strong growth, exceeding pre -crisis levels by 2021 .
A handful of countries including Ghana, Kenya, Senegal, Ethiopia and Rwanda are on track to achieve universal access to electricity by 2030, but in the STEPS – 660 million people still lack access in 2030 – including 33% of all people in Africa.
80%100%120%140%160%180% 2019 2025 2030Index (2019 = 100%) United States India China Southeast Asia Africa European UnionElectricity demand 0%100%200%300%400%500% 2019 2025 2030 Coal Gas Nuclear Wind Solar PV CO₂ emissionsElectricity supplySUMMARY IEA.
214 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return • Renewable sources of electricity have been resilient d uring the Covid -19 crisis and are set for strong growth, rising by two -thirds from 2020 to 2030 in the STEPS.
Renewables meet 80% of global electricity demand growth during the next decade and overtake coal by 2025 as the primary means of producing electri city.
By 2030, hydro, wind, solar PV, bioenergy, geothermal, concentrating solar and marine power between them provide nearly 40% of electricity supply.
China leads the way, expanding electricity from renewables by almost 1 500 TWh to 2030, which is equiva lent to all the electricity generated in France, Germany and Italy in 2019.
• Solar PV becomes the new king of electricity supply and looks set for massive expansion.
From 2020 to 2030, solar PV grows by an average of 13% per year, meeting almost one -third of electricity demand growth over the period.
Global solar PV deployment exceeds pre -crisis levels by 2021 and sets new records each year after 2022 thanks to widely available resources, declining costs and policy support in over 130 countries.
Our analysis of solar PV financing costs indicates that, despite monetary policy measures, the weighted average cost of capital edged up in 2020 after years of going down.
Even so, policy support frameworks enable very low financing costs, making new solar PV more cost effective than coal- and gas -fired power in many countries today, including in the largest markets (United States, European Union, China and India).
For projects with low cost financing that tap high quality resources, solar PV is now the cheapest source of electricity in history.
• Global coal -fired generation recovers from an 8% drop in 2020, but never returns to its 2018 peak.
Coal's share of global electricity generation falls to 28% in 2030 in the STEPS, down from 37% in 2019 and 35% in 2020.
Challenging market conditions contribute to 275 GW of coal -fired capacity retirements by 2025 (13% of the 2019 total), including 100 GW in the United States and 75 GW in the European Union, where 16 out of 27 EU member states aim to phase out all unabat ed coal.
However, global coal retirements are nearly offset by new additions through to 2025, with 130 GW of capacity under construction, mostly in China, India and Southeast Asia.
As a result, g lobal CO 2 emissions from the power sector edge above 13 Gt by 2024 and stabilise to 2030 but never return to pre-crisis level s. However, emissions fall by 38% from 2020 to 2030 in the Sustainable Development Scenario .
• Flexibility is the cornerstone of electricity security in modern power systems.
Electricity networ ks have a central part to play in unlocking flexibility from power plants, energy storage and demand- side resources.
Revenue for many transmission system operators are set to decline in 2020, which could present an electricity security risk if they do not quickly recover.
In the STEPS, grids are modernised, expanded and digitalised, and grid investment reaches $46 0 billion in 2030, two-thirds more than in 2019 .
Over the next ten years, 2 million km of transmission and 14 million km of distribution lines ar e added in the STEPS, 80% more than the network expansion over the past decade.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 215 6 6.1 Introduction The Covid -19 crisis has reinforced the importance of electricity to modern economies.
In the face of sharp reductions in electricity demand and workforce challenges, electricity supply was able to maintain its pre -crisis level of service around the world.
It played a vital role in supporting essential services, including healthcare, as well in powering the technology that enabled people to work from home, keep informed and keep in touch with family and friends.
Electricity demand was reduced by up to 25% in the weeks following lockdowns with the most severe impacts on the services sector (IEA, 2020a) .
Industry activity and use of electricity were reduced, while residential electricity demand increased modestly as a result of more time being spent at home and a rise in teleworking and remote education.
Electricity supply responded quickly to these demand reductions.
The share of renewables in generation increased because most renewable projects have long -term contracts, very low operating costs and receive priority access to the grid.
As a result, renewables -based electricity generation is set to increase in 2020, in contrast to all other sources of electricity.
Nuclear power was affected generally less than others by lockdown measures but reduced output to match lower electricity demand.
Gas -fired power generation is set to decline in 2020 for only the second time in the last thirty years, though depressed natural gas prices meant that coal -fired generation was hit hardest by the crisis, squeezed by the rise of renewables and strong cost competition from gas -fired power.
The power sector that emerges from 2020 and the Covid -19 pandemic is certain to be different from the one that existed before the crisis in ways that are not yet completely clear.
Much will depend on the extent, severity and duration of the Covid -19 pandemic and on the nature and pace of economic recovery.
The actions taken by policy makers will be important in shaping the recovery, notably in terms of economic stimulus spending and incentives for behavioural changes.
Wider policy ambitions, technology development and prevailing market conditions will also continue to shape the trajectory of electricity demand and supply.
This chapter provides an assessment of the outlook for electricity demand and supply over the coming decades.
It examines in particular the changing use of electricity by sector on the demand side, and the growth of renewables on the supply side.
It examines the effect of support frameworks on financing costs for solar photovoltaics (PV) and the changing roles of coal and natural gas in power generation.
In addition, it explores the role of flexibility in electricity systems including rising needs, the central role of conventional power plants, the critical role of networks, and the expanding suite of flexibility sources, including energy storage and demand -side response.
It closes by considering the implications of these trends for three key sustainability metrics: carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions, pollutant emissions and energy a ccess.
Figures and tables from this chapter are accessible through your IEA account : .
216 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return 6.2 Outlook for electricity demand 6.2.1 Overview After an expected decline of 2% in 2020, or almost 500 terawatt -hours (TWh) , the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) sees global electricity demand1 increase by close to 3% between 2020 and 2021 to surpass pre -Covid -19 levels ( Figure 6.2).
This jump is especially pronounced for the hardest hit services and industry sectors as shops and businesses reopen and industrial activity returns to pre -Covid -19 levels.
By 2025 global electricity demand is more than 10% higher than in 2019, surpassing 26 000 TWh.
After 2025, global electricity demand grows steadily and reaches almost 29 000 TWh by 2030.
A prolongation of the pandemic or deeper structural damage to economies, however, could significantly delay the recovery of electricity demand projected in the STEPS: the resu lting implications are explored in the Delayed Recovery Scenario in Chapter 8.
Figure 6.2 ⊳ Global electricity demand and share of electricity in total final consumption in the Stated Policies Scenario Electricity has proven to be more indispensable than ever during the Covid- 19 pandemic, and meets an increasing share of energy demand growth as economies recover Note : 2020e = estimate d values for 2020 .
While electricity demand is se t to fall in 2020, its provision of many essential services has placed it at the centre of modern economies and means that electricity fare s better than other fuels, with its share in the f inal energy mix increas ing by 0.
The share of electricity in global final energy demand is muted somewhat in 2021 in the STEPS as wider energy demand rebounds, in particular for oil in transport.
Nevertheless accelerating electrificatio n and growing demand in the services and industry sectors push 1 Electricity demand is defined as total gross electricity generated less own use generation, plus net trade (imports less exports), less transmission and distribution losses.
5%10%15%20%25%30% 5 10 15 20 25 30 2018 2019 2020e 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2030Thousand TWhElectricity demand Share of electricity in total final consumption (right axis) IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 217 6 electricity's share of final energy demand to reach 20.4% by 2025, 21.4% by 2030 and over 24% by 2040.
The Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) outlines a pathway in which electricity moves even more decisively to the centre of the energy stage with faster electrification pushing its share of final energy demand to 31% by 2040 (s ee Box 6.1 ).
6.2.2 Electricity demand by sector The Covid -19 pandemic caused the almost complete shutdown of many retail, hospitality, tourism, office and education activities during lockdown periods, as well as major reductions in industrial activity.
Electricity demand from the services sector is set to drop by around 5% globa lly in 2020 ( Figure 6.3) and by about 10% in major economies in the European Union (EU) .
In the STEPS, the services sector sees a strong rebound in 2021 (+3%) as shops, offices and schools move towards a normal level of activity, but a return to 2019 demand levels is not expected until 2022.
Figure 6.3 ⊳ Annual change in global electricity demand by sector in the Stated Policies Scenario Demand in the industry and services sectors surges in the short term as economies recover, while higher incomes and electrification drive growth in electricity demand in the residential and transport sectors Note: 2020e = estimate d values for 2020 .
In the industry sector, the closure of factories during lockdowns depressed demand, as did the ensuing economic crisis and disruption to global trade.
As a result, electricity demand in industry is set to fall by more than 3% in 2020 before returning to 2019 levels by the end of 2021 in the STEPS.
However, the global picture masks significant regional disparities.
Advanced economies account for almost 60% o f the drop in industry electricity demand in 2020, but only around 20% of the growth in 2021.
Emerging market and developing economies, led by China, see industry electricity demand grow by over 4% in 2021, after a drop of only 2% in 2020.
- 400- 2000 200 400 2020e 2030 2020e 2030 2020e 2030 2020e 2030Industry Residential Services TransportTWh IEA.
218 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return Economic recov ery measures support increased activity and electricity demand in heavy industries such as iron and steel, aluminium and chemicals.
Nonetheless, it is growth in light industry and its increased use of electric motor systems that is the largest single drive r of electricity demand growth to 2025, accounting for one -quarter of the increase worldwide.
A weaker economic recovery would reduce growth in electricity demand from both light and heavy industry relative to the STEPS levels, with potential long -term eff ects if electricity -intensive industrial units are shut or if businesses close their doors permanently (see Chapter 8).
On the other hand, new commitments to develop electrolytic hydrogen production could significantly increase electricity demand: in the S TEPS, less than 10 TWh is used to produce 0.4 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe) of hydrogen by 2030, compared to almost 400 TWh in the SDS.
Residential electricity demand is also set to increase in the STEPS.
Lockdowns and activity restrictions during 2020 led to more time spent at home, more teleworking and more use of digital entertainment.
This increased electricity demand in both advanced and emerging economies; total residential electricity demand in 2020 is expected to be more than 1% higher than in 2019.
Some of the changes brought about by the pandemic are likely to prove enduring.
For example, it seems likely that the number of people working from home will remain well above pre -Covid -19 levels over the coming years.
However, it is the rise in the number of major household appliances and air conditioners in emerging market and developing economies that drives over 80% of the 700 TWh increase in global residential electricity demand to 2025.
Demand for residential space cooling alone increases b y 260 TWh to 2025.
An additional 285 million people get access to electricity by 2030 in the STEPS, but they add less than 80 TWh to demand in 2030 and account for only 1% of total demand growth to 2030 (see section 6.5.2).
Electricity demand in the transport sector is expected to rise by nearly 5% (20 TWh) in 2020.
Reductions in passenger rail activity during lockdowns have pushed down electricity demand in rail, though it has been more than offset by electricity demand growth in road transport.
While the current crisis has led to an overall drop in vehicle sales worldwide, electric cars have fared relatively well, with sales expected to increase from 2 million cars in 2019 to almost 2.5 million in 2020, or 3% of global car sales.
Uptake of electric vehicle s (cars, buses, trucks and two/three wheelers) continues to accelerate in the STEPS with 150 million electric vehicles, including 35 million electric cars, added to the global fleet between 2020 and 2025, increasing electricity demand by around 150 TWh.
By 2030, a fleet of 110 million electric cars together with other kinds of electric vehicles account for over 500 TWh of demand, with total transport electricity demand surpassing 1 000 TWh or 3.5% of the global total.
The global electric car fleet triples b etween 2030 and 2040, adding another 450 TWh to electricity demand and bringing total electricity demand in transport to over 2 000 TWh, which represents 6% of the global total in 2040.
In the SDS, electrification in the transport sector is even more significant, with the sector accounting for almost 11% of global demand by 2040.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 219 6 6.2.3 Electricity demand by region The impact of the Covid -19 crisis on electricity demand by region is a function of the level of lockdown, structure of the economy and the level of re sultant economic damage in different countries ( Figure 6.4).
The future outlook for electricity demand depends to a large extent on how rapidly each region can return towards pre -crisis levels of economic activity and consumer confidence.
Figure 6.4 ⊳ Changes in electricity demand in selected regions in the Stated Policies Scenario Electricity demand in emerging market and developing economies rapidly surpasses 2019 levels, while the impact of Covid -19 on demand is longer lasting in advanced economies Note: Changes in electricity demand from 2019 to 2020 are based on most recent monthly data where available and are a m odelled result where not available .
In emerging market and developing economies , the decline in electricity demand in 2020 looks likely to be limited to 1% (140 TWh), largely reflecting continued demand growth in China offsetting declines elsewhere.
Rapid population growth and an expected economic rebound lead to a swift recovery in demand, which surpasses 2019 levels in 2021 and then grows until 2030 by over 3% annually.
Despite the rebound, certain developing economies, notably India (see Box 6.2), are n ot expected to recover the economic and electricity demand growth lost in 2020.
As a result, electricity demand in the STEPS in this Outlook remains below the World Energy Outlook -2019 (WEO -2019 ) (IEA, 2019a) STEPS levels throughout the projection period to 2040.
Improvements in energy efficiency contribute to reduce potential demand growth across emerging market and developing economies; most of the savings result from improvements in technologies, raising the average efficiency level of industrial motor s ystems and consumer goods sold in local markets.
Efficiency - 200 0 200 400 600 800 1 000 1 200 1 4002015-19 2019-20 2020-25 2025-30 Net change European Union JapanMiddle East United StatesIndia Southeast AsiaChina TWh2019 -25Africa IEA.
220 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return improvements from 2020 to 2030 in the STEPS avoid almost 1 700 TWh of demand in 2030 (Figure 6.5), 40% more than savings in advanced economies.
There is significant potential for policy action to further increase efficiency savings across emerging market and developing economies; in the SDS, implementing more stringent energy efficiency standards increases the annual savings to 3 400 TWh in 2030.
Figure 6.5 ⊳ Drivers of electricity demand in emerging market and developing economies in the Stated Policies Scenario Electricity demand returns to pre -Covid -19 levels by 2021 and grows strongly thereafter, with industry and household consumption driving future demand growth Notes: Other refers to all uses of electricity not detailed in the figure.
Avoided demand due to energy efficiency and drivers of demand growth are shown from the year of demand recovering to 2019 levels.
China is the only major economy expected to see hi gher electricity demand in 2020 than in 2019.
While stringent restrictions on activity and mobility led to a drop in electricity demand in the first -quarter 2020, the limited spread of Covid -19 in China combined with a rapid industry -led recovery is expect ed to push electricity demand above 2019 levels by the end of 2020.
With an average growth rate of 3 %, demand in the STEPS increases by 1 300 TWh between 2019 and 2025.
Industry continues to be the main source of electricity demand in China , accounting for half of this growth in demand to 2025 , the majority of which is needed to power electric motor systems in light industry such as manufacturing and to a lesser extent in heavy industries such as steel, aluminium and cement.
S timulus measures in China to da te focus on infrastructure and industrial development, with firms benefiting from wider availability of credit, and this helps fuel an increase in electricity demand for heavy industry of 260 TWh through to 2030.
The average efficiency level of electric mo tors in industry improves from IE1 2 in 2019 to IE3 in 2030, with efficiency improvements across the industry sector saving around 500 TWh annually by 2030.
2 Based on the International Electro- technical Commission's International Efficiency standards for electric motors that range from low (IE0) to super premium (IE4).
10 00014 00018 00022 00026 000 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040TWh OtherSpace heatingMajor appliancesCoolingRoad transportElectricity demand without efficiency savings Electricity demandDigital and small appliances Energy accessLight industry IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 221 6 Several major uncertainties could influence the evolution of electricity demand in China.
Today its industry sector is strongly dependant on export markets, and so downgrading of the global macro -economic outlook represents a risk factor for electricity demand.
A delayed economic recovery in China could also reduce the domestic market for China's indust rial output, leading to lower electricity demand growth (see Chapter 8).
Demand growth could however also be much higher, for example as a result of additional policies to translate China's roadmap for hydrogen into rapid expansion of electrolytic hydrogen production: in the SDS, additional policies of this kind increase electricity demand for electrolytic hydrogen from less than 10 TWh by 2040 in the STEPS to 320 TWh.
In advanced economies , the hard -hit services sector is responsible for almost 60% of an expected 330 TWh (3.3%) drop in electricity demand in 2020, with a return to pre -Covid -19 levels only in 2023.
The electrification of mobility and heat has the potential to increase demand, but a low starting point means that a visible impact remains severa l years off: around 20% of households currently heat with electricity and less than 1% of vehicles are electric in advanced economies ( Figure 6.6).
Impl emented and announced efficiency policies shape demand trends over the coming decades as existing equipment ages and is replaced by more efficient devices, avoiding nearly 1 200 TWh in 2030.
Many of the efficiency savings occur as a result of new standards for consumer appliances, air conditioners and industrial motor systems.
Figure 6.6 ⊳ Drivers of electricity demand in advanced economies in the Stated Policies Scenario Electricity demand returns to pre -Covid -19 levels by 2023, accelerating electrification of transport, expanding demand for cooling, digitalisation and industry drive future growth Notes: Other refers to all uses of electricity not detailed in the figure.
Avoided demand due to energy efficiency and drivers of demand growth are shown from the year of demand recovering to 2019 levels.
9 00010 00011 00012 00013 000 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040TWh OtherSpace heatingCoolingRoad transportElectricity demand without efficiency savings Electricity demandDigital and small appliancesLight industry IEA.
222 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return Electricity demand across the United States is exp ected to fall markedly in 2020, with sharp reductions in the industry and services sectors as a result of lockdowns and the resultant economic crisis, though this is partially offset by an increase in residential cooling demand.
After the financial crisis in 2009, US electricity demand rebounded in 2010 and then remained broadly flat until 2020, but accelerating electrification in a number of areas affects the outlook.
The STEPS sees electricity demand rebounding in 2021, surpassing 2019 levels in 2022, and then growing at 0.5% each year on average through to 2030.
The number of electric vehicles increases fivefold, contributing nearly 50 TWh to demand growth over this period.
Electricity demand in the European Union has been flattening since 2006 and is exp ected to remain subdued in the next couple of years before returning to pre -crisis levels in 2023.
Stringent efficiency standards in the European Union for consumer goods and industrial equipment play an important role in shaping the electricity demand out look: they bring savings of around 250 TWh annually by 2030 as existing stock is gradually replaced with much more efficient new stock.
Electric vehicle (EV) sales are expected to triple to almost 900 000 in 2020, taking 5% of the EU market.
By 2030, the i mpact of electrification on demand is increasingly noticeable in the STEPS, with an additional 70 TWh for road transport and almost 40 TWh for electrification of heat , offsetting 40% of the demand reductions brought about by efficiency improvements.
Full implementation of the European Green Deal and other recovery packages w ould see acceleration both of efficiency improvements and the electrification of energy use, with plans for a rapid increase in electrolytic hydrogen production having the potential to increase demand significantly.
In the SDS, electricity use for hydrogen production increases to 200 TWh by 2030, compared to just over 5 TWh in the STEPS.
6.3 Outlook for electricity supply 6.3.1 Overview Global electricity supply is being reshaped by technology development and by energy security and sustainability goals.
Renewables and nuclear power combined generated more electricity than coal for the first time in 2019 and are on track to open a permanent lead (Figure 6.7).
By 2030, renewables and nuclear power provide nearly half of global electricity supply in the STEPS.
Electricity generation from renewables is set to overtake that from coal-fired power plants by 2025, with solar PV and wind power spearheading growth, aided by falling costs, widespread resource availability and strong policy support – 166 countries now have targets for renewables in power (REN21, 2020).
Hydropower re mains the largest low emissions source of electricity globally through to 2030 in the STEPS, while also providing flexibility and other power system services.
Progress in deployment of other renewables in power generation – bioenergy, geothermal, concentra ting solar and marine – helps to diversify electricity supply.
Nuclear power continues to provide about 10% of global electricity supply through to 2030.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 223 6 several percentage points in 2020, coal's share in the global power mix declines from 35% in 2020 to 28% in 2030.
Gas -fired power maintains market share of about 23% through to 2030, proving versatile in a dynamic period.
Figure 6.7 ⊳ Renewables, nuclear and coal shares of global electricity supply in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2010-2030 Renewables and nuclear overtook coal for the first time in 2019 and extend their lead through to 2030; renewables are on track to supply more power globally than coal by 2025 Although the mix of fuels for power generation is changing, increasing electricity demand after 2020 in the STEPS leads to a rise in generation f rom all fuels, except for oil.
Electricity generation from coal rises by 2% between 2020 and 2030, and from natural gas by nearly 20%, outweighing reductions from oil.
A slower economic recovery, a natural gas price that stays lower for longer and new measures to support renewables, however, could all still reduce demand for coal further and re -shape the power mix faster than in the STEPS.
Over the next decade, global power plant construction shifts away from coal towards solar PV and wind.
A shrinking pipeline of new projects means that new construction of coal-fired power slows dramatically in the STEPS, while solar PV and wind recover to precrisis levels of deployment by 2021 and step up growth thereafter.
Solar PV is set to continue to be the favourite for new construction, bolstered by short construction times, very low levelised costs, ready availability of manufacturing capacity and the scope it offers to reduce pollution (Figure 6.8).
The security of supply chains and the availability of suitable land will become more important as the solar industry scales up.
Direct financial support for solar PV is no longer necessary in most cases, though supportive policy frameworks to stabilise revenues still have a critical role in accelerating deployment and reducing the delivered costs of new projects (see section 6.3.3 on utility -scale solar financing cost).
Wind power is also set for strong growth, with the offshore wind industry maturing and adding to onshore developments on the back of the increasingly competitive pricing seen in recent auctions.
10%20%30%40%50% 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030Coal Other renewables WindNuclear Solar PV Hydro IEA.
224 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return Figure 6.8 ⊳ Global average annual power capacity additions in the Stated Policies Scenario Power plant construction continues to shift away from coal -fired plants towards solar PV, wind and other renewable sources of electricity Note s: GW = gigawatts.
Other renewables includes marine, concentrat ing solar power and geothermal.
Hydropower sees modest growth in the STEPS as suitable sites for large -scale projects become scarce in most regions.
The nuclear power industry continues to expand following the c ompletion of the first EPR and AP1000 reactors in China in 2018, and the first Hualong -1 reactor is scheduled to begin operations in China by the end of 2020.
The projected construction of nuclear plants in the late 2020s in the STEPS calls for an increase in new project starts in the next few years after a marked slowdown in recent years.
Global power sector investment bounces back to pre -crisis levels in 2021 as the global economy recovers after a steep drop in 2020.
Total power sector investment rises to $980 billion in 2030, 30% above the level in 2019.
Over the next decade, the power sector accounts for almost 40% of total investment in energy supply, exceeding upstream investment in oil and gas by more than 10%.
By 2040, annual investment in the power sector nears $1.2 trillion.
Investment in renewables and nuclear power reaches pre -crisis levels in 2021 and then rises steadily to over $420 billion by 2030 ( Figure 6.9).
Renewables and nuclear power combined account for up to 80% of total power generation investment over the next decade, with the vast majority going to renewables.
Investment in solar PV and wind amounts to an average of $240 billion each year through to 2030: this is on a par with investment levels over the past seven years, but falling costs mean that the same level of investment buys an increased amount of capacity.
An average of over $50 billion is invested in nuclear power per year over the next decade to build new large -scale projects and to start deploying small modular reactors, a step up from the level of spending in the past decade.
Investment in coal -fired power without carbon captur e, utilisation and storage (CCUS) drops to $35 billion each year to 2030, some 40% below pre -crisis levels and 40 80 120 160 Coal Gas Nuclear Hydro Wind Solar PV Other renewablesGW 2011-15 2016-19 2020-25 2026-30 IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 225 6 two-thirds below the peak reached in 2011.
Gas -fired power investment holds steady at nearly $50 billion per year, despite challenging market con ditions and difficulties in obtaining finance in some markets, including Europe.
Battery storage gains ground as a source of power system flexibility, with investment increasing six-fold to $25 billion by 2030.
Figure 6.9 ⊳ Global power sector investment in the Stated Policies Scenario Investment in renewables recovers quickly and then rises through to 2030, while grids capture a growing portion of total investment to modernise and digitalise power systems Note: investment for oil includes only utility -scale facilities.
Capital spending on electricity networks bounces back in 2021 after a di p in 2020 and increases to $46 0 billion in 2030, up two -thirds from the level in 2019.
Transmission and distribution grids capture a rising share of total power sector investment in recognition of their critical role in supporting modern power systems and clean energy transitions.
This investment expands and modernises transmission and distribution grids, including further digitalisation and raising asset utilisation.
Box 6.1 ⊳ Comparison of the electricity outlook to 2030 in the Stated Policies and Sustainable Development scenarios The outlook for electricity demand in the SDS reflects both maj or improvements in energy efficiency relative to the STEPS, which reduces demand, and accelerated electrification of energy end -uses, which increases demand.
The net result is that global electricity demand in the SDS is almost 1 000 TWh (3.3%) below the demand levels in the STEPS in 2030.
The rapid shift to low -carbon electricity in the SDS means that the difference in CO 2 emissions with the STEPS is greater than the difference in demand.
In the SDS, annual power sector CO 2 emissions fall to 8 gigatonnes (Gt) by 2030, a decline of close to 40% 100200300400500600700 2010 2020 2030 2040Billion dollars (2019)Historical Projections Grids Renewables Batteries Nuclear Gas Coal Oil IEA.
226 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return from 2020 levels, and then fall again to 3.2 Gt by 2040.
In the STEPS, by contrast, they remain at around 13 Gt right through to 2040.
The higher level of efficiency improvements in the SDS damp ens demand, notably in industry, where demand is nearly 600 TWh lower than in the STEPS thanks in large part to major improvements in the efficiency of electric motor systems.
Achieving these savings requires a shift to IE3 or higher efficiency standards for all motors sold between from now to 2030.
There are also major efficiency gains in the buildings sector for appliances, air conditioners and other electricity -using equipment.
The reduction in demand from these efficiency savings is partially offset by in creasing electrification.
A major increase in electrolytic hydrogen production in the SDS adds almost 400 TWh to demand in 2030 relative to STEPS.
In the transport sector, demand is more than 400 TWh higher in the SDS by 2030, with almost 850 million EVs on the roads compared to 630 million in the STEPS.
The SDS also sees increased electrification of heating and cooking, although efficiency gains mean that net demand in buildings is more than 800 TWh lower than in the STEPS by 2030.
Achieving universal acce ss to electricity for the 66 0 million who remain without it in the STEPS adds only 120 TWh to demand in the SDS.
While pushing energy efficiency towards its maximum potential in the SDS puts downward pressure on electricity demand, increased electrification of energy end -uses means that electricity's share in final energy demand rises to 24% by 2030.
Beyond 2030, hydrogen production from electrolysis takes off in the European Union and several other regions in the SDS, and this helps push electricity demand above 35 000 TWh by 2040, only 680 TWh lower than in the STEPS.
Figure 6.10 ⊳ Redoubling efforts to shift to a sustainable electricity pathway Clean energy transitions in the SDS require the scaling up of solar PV and wind to displace coal alongside increases in energy efficiency and electrification 50 100 150 200 250 300 201619202025202630201619202025202630GW Historical STEPS SDSAnnual capacity additions Wind Solar PV 2 4 6 8 10 12 2015 2020 2025 2030 Thousand TWhUnabated coal generation IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 227 6 The SDS reduces CO 2 emissions from electricity supply primarily through increasing the use of r enewables and nuclear power.
In the SDS, these technologies account for nearly two-thirds of electricity generation in 2030, while the share of coal -fired power without CCUS falls to 15% ( Figure 6.10 ).
This is achieved by measures to:  Accelerate the contributions of wind and solar PV by increasing the global capacity additions of solar PV by 90% and wind by 70% over the next decade.
 Emphasise smart digital grid infrastructure and expand available flexibility sources.
 Bolster nuclear power by supporting lifetime extensions while ensuring safe operations, expanding new builds by 15% to 2030 in countries open to nuclear power, and drivi ng innovation, including in small modular reactors.
 Support the development and deployment of CCUS technologies.
 Reduce unabated coal -fired generation by 50% by 2030.
6.3.2 Renewables Renewables have proved to be resilien t in the face of Covid -19 lockdown measu res and are on track for modest growth in 2020.
In the STEPS, renewable electricity supply rises by 5% per year to 2030 , with solar PV and wind acting as the main engines of growth.
By 2030, renewables produce close to 12 500 TWh, which is 25% more than coal -fired generation at its peak in 2018.
Hydropower remains the largest renewable source of electricity to 2030, though new projects are limited largely to China, Latin America and Africa, and the emphasis is on re -powering existing hydropower d ams and a dding pumping facilities to increase flexibility.
In the SDS, renewables -based electricity generation increases even faster at 8% per year.
Solar PV is set for the largest growth of any renewable source.
Average generation costs for solar PV have fallen 80 % since 2010, and it enjoys support of one kind or another in over 130 countries.
Support frameworks have made possible low cost financing for solar PV (and other technologies), and this has played a large part in reducing costs and helping to deliver reco rd low prices (see section 6.3.3).
Solar PV deployment rebounds to pre -crisis levels by 2021 in the STEPS and continues to expand thereafter (Figure 6.11).
In the SDS, worldwide solar PV capacity additions reach 280 GW in 2030 and 320 GW in 2040.
3 Wind similarly sees strong growth.
Wind power generation costs have declined by about 40% on average globally over the past decade, and it enjoys policy support in about 130 countries, more than 70 of which intend to develop offshore projects.
Technology improvements and low cost financing are poised to drive down offshore wind costs further to around $50 per megawatt- hour (MWh) in the next five years, which is about half the costs of recently completed projects (IEA, 2019b) .
In the SDS, wind capacity additions reach 145 GW in 2030 and 160 GW in 2040.
3 A forthcoming WEO special report on solar explores further its potential role in clean energy transitions.
228 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return Figure 6.11 ⊳ Solar PV and wind power capacity additions in the Stated Policies Scenario Buoyed by low costs and by policy support in more than 130 countries, solar PV and wind power markets are expected to recover quickly and push to new heights Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Box 6.2 ⊳ Can solar PV keep pace with India's electricity demand growth?
At 850 kilowatt- hours (kWh) per capita, average electricity use levels in India are less than 30% of the global average.
The economy has huge growth potential, and the scope for energy demand growth is tremendous.
However, electricity demand in India has been flat or declining for almost two years.
The deceleration of demand began in the latter half of 2019 during an economic slowdown that preceded the onset of the Covid -19 crisis.
Car manufacturing and construction activities dropped to their lowest recorded levels in decades, and industrial electricity demand fell by 2% in 2019 afte r eight years of annual average growth of 5.5%.
As a consequence of the pandemic, India's economic prospects were revised downward, from an economic growth of nearly 8% per year to 2025 to little more than half that rate.
Activity in the industry and servi ces sectors is not expected to recover until late in 2021, not least because of the extensive disruption to supply chains caused during the lockdown.
Residential electricity demand, however, has been resilient in 2019 and 2020.
Total electricity demand is expected to drop by around 3% in 2020 before returning to pre -Covid levels during 2021, and then to rise by over 5% per year through to 2030.
The residential sector is a pillar of demand growth, with rapid increases in appliance and air conditioner ownersh ip in the 2020s driving a 250 TWh increase by 2030.
Coal has long been the primary means of generating electricity in India.
With lower electricity demand and priority being given to renewables and natural gas, coal -fired power generation in India is on tr ack to fall below 70% of generation for the first time in 50 100 150 200 250 2010 2015 2019 2020e 2030 2040 2010 2015 2019 2020e 2030 2040GWRest of world Middle East Africa Southeast Asia India China Japan European Union United StatesWind Solar PV IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 229 6 a decade, and its share of generation is set to decline steadily through to 2030.
In the STEPS, India's coal -fired capacity plateaus by 2025 ( Figure 6.12 ), mainly due to ambitious targets for renewables, including the aim for renewables capacity to reach 175 GW by 2022 and for it to account for 60% of total capacity by 2030 (nearly double the share in 2019).
Expanded deployment of solar PV, at both utility -scale and distributed form, is seen as the primary means of achieving these goals, complemented by onshore wind power.
The emphasis on solar PV in a country with peak electricity demand most often in the evening places a premium on storage, which grows rapidly and eventually surpasses coal -fired capacity.
Figure 6.12 ⊳ Power capacity in India by source in the Stated Policies Scenario Coal-fired capacity in India plateaus following the completion of the 33 GW under construction at the start of 2020, while solar PV increases fivefold over the next decade 6.3.3 Coal -fired power Global coal -fired generation is on track for an 8% reduction in 2020, the largest in history, squeezed by lower electricity demand, increasing output from renewables and stronger cost competition with gas -fired power plants.
In the STEPS, global coal -fired generation never again reaches the pre -crisis p eak set in 2018.
After a near -term rebound, coal -fired output remains broadly stable to 2030: coal use in power generation is cut by 40% in advanced economies, but it is more than offset by continued growth in emerging market and developing economies.
In t he SDS, global coal -fired generation without CCUS declines by nearly half from 2020 to 2030.
The financial situation has worsened for nearly all coal -fired power plants in 2020.
For generators operating in competitive markets, such as those in the United S tates and European Union, revenues have been hit by both depressed wholesale electricity prices and reduced operating hours.
In regulated markets, such as in China, India and Southeast Asia, 200 400 600 800 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040GWHistorical Projections Natural gasCoal NuclearSolar PV Wind HydroBattery storage IEA.
230 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return generators receive a fixed price but revenues have fallen in line with lower electricity demand, worsening the financial situation for about two -thirds of the global coal fleet.
In advanced economies , the use of coal -fired power is on track to fall by an unprecedented 20% in 2020.
This follows a record 14% drop in 2019 and accelerates the downward trend of the past decade.
By 2030, coal- fired generation in the STEPS drops to half the level in 2019 and is 70% below the peak level reached in 2007.
The reductions are linked to an extensive wave of coal plant retirements off set by very few new additions.
About 280 GW of coal -fired capacity is retired from 2021 to 2030 in advanced economies due to challenging market conditions, decarbonisation policies and pollution regulations, which bring installed coal capacity in advanced economies back to the level in 1970.
In the United States , an ageing fleet of coal plants faces extremely challenging market conditions as wind and solar PV capacity expands and as gas- fired power prices reach very low levels.
Natural gas was available for well below $2 per million British thermal units througho ut the first -half of 2020, making it cheaper than it has been for decades.
Under such conditions, many coal -fired power plants have become loss -making and confidence in the long -term profitability of coal is fading, making it extremely difficult to refurbi sh existing plants.
Furthermore, there is a growing list of ambitious clean energy targets set by US states or utilities that require reductions in unabated coal -fired generation.
From 2021 to 2030, coal plant retirements average almost 15 GW per year in t he STEPS, which represents a 50% increase on the average over the past decade ( Figure 6.13 ).
Overall US coal-fired power capacity falls 60% from 2019 lev els by 2030 and 80% by 2040.
Figure 6.13 ⊳ Average annual coal-fired power capacity additions and retirements by region in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2011-2030 Advanced economies see a wave of coal plant retirements and few new builds to 2030: the net capacity reductions more than offset slowing capacity additions elsewhere - 200 20 40 60GW 2011-19 2020-30 2011-19 2020-30Additions Retirements United StatesEuropean UnionSoutheast AsiaIndia Africa Rest ofworldOther advanced economiesChina IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 231 6 In the European Union, the average annual retirement of coal -fired capacity doubles in the STEPS to close to 10 GW per year through to 2030 , reflecting increasing ambition by many governments and utilities to shift away from unabated coal -fired power .
So far, 16 out of 27 EU member states have endorsed or have begun consi deration of phase -out plans over the coming decades, including Germany, Europe's largest coal consumer .
These countries between them had about 100 GW of coal -fired capacity in operation in 2019, account ing for over two -thirds of the coal fleet in the E uropean Union .
The e conomic viability of coalfired generation has drastically decreased in many parts of the European Union; coal generation is set to drop by more than 20% in 2020 as a result.
Some EU member states are now considering an acceleration of phas e-out timeline s, while others are delaying or abandoning new coal-fired capacity projects .
New EU environment al standards which come into effect in 2021 add to the pressures on coal.
In Japan, intentions to phase out inefficient coal -fired power plants were announced in July 2020.
Of the 140 coal -fired power plants in operation, more than two -thirds would be retired.
This will help to fulfil Japan's target for coal to provide 26% of generation in 2030 set out in its basic energy plan.
In emerging market an d developing economies , coal -fired generation is set to decline in 2020 for the first time in the modern era.
Economic recoveries bring coal -fired output above pre -crisis levels by 2022, however, and continued growth to 2030 is underpinned by a large pipel ine of new coal plants, including 110 GW under construction and more than four -times that amount at some stage of planning.
In the STEPS, 300 GW of new coal capacity comes online in emerging market and developing economies between 2020 and 2030; this repre sents 90% of total new coal capacity in the period.
By 2030, nearly 85% of the world's coal -fired capacity in operation is in emerging market and developing economies, up from 7 5% in 2020.
China continues to build an average of 17 GW of new coal -fired plant per year through to 2025, with many new projects in progress despite a current excess of power capacity, weakened electricity demand outlook and recognition of the imperative to reduce coal use to address climate change.
The pace of China's coal addi tions slows after 2025.
In India, coal-fired capacity plateaus by 2030 in the STEPS due to reduced prospects for economic growth and electricity demand growth (a marked change from the WEO -2019 ).
The pace of coal -fired capacity additions reduces by three -quarters compared to the past decade, as India looks to rely to a greater extent on renewable energy, with a strong emphasis on solar PV ( see Box 6.2).
Southeast Asia has 26 GW of coal capacity under construction and several times as much at the planning stage.
However, financing is becoming more difficult in the region as international lenders increasingly are shy of unabated coal projects.
Despite the reductions in global coal -fired generation capacity that lie ahead, coal remains the largest single source of electricity in the STEPS, and its use in 2030 is within 10% of its pre-crisis peak.
Even in 2040 it is within 15% of that peak.
The SDS would lead to a much IEA.
232 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return more rapid decline in the use of coal for power generation and a delayed recovery would also depress its prospects.
6.3.4 Natural g as-fired power Gas-fired power has been relatively resilient during the Covid -19 crisis and is on track for a modest 1% decline in 2020.
Record low gas prices in the United States, Canada, Europe and Asia have increased coal -to-gas switching opportunities, protecting the use of natural gas to some extent from lower electricity demand.
In the STEPS, global gas -fired generation recovers to pre -crisis levels by 2022 and increases by 20% from 2020 to 2030.
More than three -quarters of this growth takes place in emerging market and developing economies, where electricity demand is rising rapidly.
In advanced economies, the role of gas -fired power shifts towards providing flexibility, with the average amount of generation per unit of gas -fired capacity declining through to 2030.
The global share of gas in the power mix holds steady at around 22 -23% over the next decade.
In advanced economies, gas is the single largest source of electricity and powers some 30% of generation.
In emerging market and developing economies, gas provides nearly 20% of generation currently, and this increases in lock -step with demand.
As a dispatchable source of electricity, uncertainties about the prospects for gas -fired generation are linked to uncertainties about total electricity demand, the amount of renewables in the system, and the price competitiveness of gas.
The pace of economic recovery, the amount of stimulus spending directed towards renewables and prevailing natural gas prices in key marke ts will all have an important bearing on the level of gas demand.
In the SDS, global gas -fired generation increases by 4% between 2020 and 2030, compared with 20% in the STEPS.
6.3.5 Nuclear power Nuclear power provided about 10% of global electricity supply in 2019 and was the secondlargest low emissions source behind hydropower.
Global nuclear power production in 2019 was the second -highest on record, and higher than in 2010 before the accident at Fukushima Daiichi in Japan, but output is set to fall by 125 TWh in 2020, mainly as a result of lower electricity demand linked to the Covid -19 pandemic.
Nuclear power has contributed to electricity security: most reactors remained available throughout the crisis, despite lower than normal levels of operation, and nuclear plants have been able to provide a degree of system flexibility, while also lessening reliance on imported fossil fuels.
By 2023, nuclear power output returns to pre -crisis levels as electricity demand recovers.
Global nuclear power output then rises in the STEPS by around 15% from 2020 to 2030, though its share of supply declines slightly as two distinct regional pathways emerge.
In the SDS, global nuclear power generation rises further to 30% to 2030.
In emerging market and developing economies , nuclear power output increases by twothirds from 2019 to 2030, raising its share of generation slightly to 6%.
Nuclear power capacity totalling 42 GW was under construction at the start of 2020 (out of 62 GW IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 233 6 globally) and nuclear power capacity rises from 110 GW to about 180 GW in 2030 (Figure 6.14) .
China is on track to become the leader in nuclear power around 2030, overtaking the United States and the European Union.
China ha d 48 nuclear reactors in operation and 11 under construction at the beginning of 2020.
China is one of the few countries that have included nuclear power, along with renewables, in the low emissions strategy in its Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement.
Significant programmes underway in Russia, India and the Middle East could add to the expansion of nuclear power.
Figure 6.14 ⊳ Nuclear power installed capacity, capacity additions and retirements in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Over the next decade, the fleet of nuclear reactors shrinks in advanced economies and most additional capacity is in emerging market and developing economies, led by China In advanced economies , nuclear power was the largest source of low emissions electricity in 2019, but output is set to fall by 10% from 2019 to 2030 as the fleet of reactors age and few new projects are built.
Over the next decade, more than 70 GW of nuclear power are permanently closed in advanced economies in the STEPS, while lifetime extensions pro long the operational life of about 120 GW that would otherwise have closed by 2030.
Some 20 GW of new nuclear power capacity was under construction at the start of 2020 in Finland, France, Japan, Korea, Slovakia, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United S tates: there is otherwise limited projected additional capacity over the next decade in advanced economies.
Total nuclear capacity declines by 20% by 2030 in the European Union, with the largest reductions in Germany (full phase out by 2022), Belgium, Spain and France.
In the United States, nuclear power capacity declines by 10% to 2030, despite the completion of two AP 1000 reactors under construction and the provision by five US states of financial lifelines to nuclear operators via zero emissions credits.
In Japan, installed capacity declines from 33 GW in 2019 to about 30 GW in 2030, though the progressive re -start of the fleet lifts 100 200 300 2019 2030 2019 2030GWEmerging market and developing economies Advanced economies RetirementsAdditions RetirementsAdditions IEA.
234 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return nuclear power output.
Even in countries that support nuclear power, there is a risk that nuclear power will fade faster than in the STEPS as a result of extremely challenging market conditions and the risks associated with new capital investment.
This is despite evidence that lifetime extensions support clean energy transitions and are the most cost -effective source of low e missions electricity in several markets (IEA, 2019c ).
Nuclear power technologies have been evolving in recent years, not least to enhance safety.
Several large -scale reactors have been completed recently using new designs, including the first EPR and AP1000 reactors built in China, and others are under construction in Europe, United States and China.
In addition to these large -scale designs, small modular reactors are gaining support because they could address several challenges to the development of large -scale nuclear power plants, in particular by reducing upfront capital investment, scaling projects to meet incremental needs, streamlining the construction process and driving down costs through standardisation and manufacturing.
Their development could be supported through cost -sharing for research and development and through i nvestment support for pilot projects including capital grants, loan guarantees and tailor -made long -term contracts (IEA, 2020b) .
In total, small modular reactors have a potential gl obal market of over 20 GW by 2035 (OECD/NEA, 2016) .
Advanced nuclear power technologies also have the potential to provide a low emissions source of flexibility for power systems.
6.3.6 Focus on financing costs for utility -scale solar PV Worldwide solar PV capacity has increased almost 20 -times over the last decade, with around 60% of the current installed capacity at utility scale.
Total capacity triples between 2020 and 2030 in the STEPS.
The declining costs of solar PV have been impressive, with innovation driving down construction costs by 80% from 2010 to 2019 (IRENA, 2020) .
Cost reductions have been complemented by improved performance resulting from higher efficiency panels and greater use of tracking equipment.
Financing co sts, however, have received little attention despite their importance.
The weighted average cost of capital (WACC) can account for 20- 50% of the levelised cost of electricity (LCOE) of utility -scale solar PV projects, and is the primary focus of this analy sis.
4 This analysis is the product of extensive work based on data from financial markets and academic literature, and on the analysis of auction results and power purchase agreements (PPAs), complemented by a large number of confidential interviews with experts and practitioners around the world.
It explores how the financing costs for utility -scale solar PV projects have evolved from 2015 to 2020 in the leading solar PV markets – Europe, United States, China and India – according to the business models implemented in each region.
These markets represented around 75% of solar PV installed capacity in 2019 and will remain crucial for the future development of solar PV.
4 The WACC is an important component of the LCOE of distributed solar PV and other capital- intensive power technologies, but was beyond the scope of this analysis.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 235 6 The analysis of business models draws on the key revenue risk components – price, volume and off -taker risk – and their implications for the cost of capital.
It focuses on models where prices paid for solar generation are defined largely by policy mechanisms, which support the vast majority of deployment worldwide.
The findings of this analysis on the prevailing average costs of capital in major solar PV markets underpin the projections in the IEA World Energy Model.
Full merchant projects (without any form of price guarantee external to markets) were considered as a point of comparison and an indicative WACC provided, though to date this model remains somewhat theoretical for solar PV.
In the long er term, this type of investment may become more common.
Financing costs with r evenue support mechanisms Over 95% of recent power sector investment ha s been linked to regulations and long -term contracts (IEA, 2019d) , and almost all utility -scale solar PV projects deployed over the last five years have emerged under models where the majority, if not all, of project revenues are defined upfront in long -term contracts (10 -20 years).
These include feed -in tariffs (FiTs), long -term PPAs, contract for differences (CfDs) – many awarded by competitive auctions – and other mechanisms that provide a degree of price certainty over the project lifetime.
Figure 6.15 ⊳ Indicative WACC for utility-scale solar PV projects with revenue support Growing market experience and competition, and lower lending base rates, have helped to reduce WACCs for utility -scale solar PV projects in recent years, but WACCs edged up in 2020 due to Covid- 19 related uncertainties Notes: WACC = w eighted average cost of capital; 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Base rate = risk -free rate (ten -year government bond).
Strong policy support and improved technology maturity have helped mitigate perceived risks for investors and financiers.
These factors helped reduc e financing costs for solar PV 2%4%6%8%10%12% 2015 2020e WACC range Base rateEurope 2015 2020eUnited States 2015 2020eChina 2015 2020eIndia IEA.
236 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return projects underpinned by revenue support mechanisms by 15-30% between 2015 and 2019 (Figure 6.15).
In 2019, WACCs for new p rojects st ood at 2.6 -5.0% in Europe and the United States (in nominal terms after tax), 4.
4-5.4% in China and 8.8 -10.0% in India (Table 6.1).
The Covid -19 crisis is having a mixed effect on WACCs.
On the one hand, central banks in some countries have opted for expansive monetary policies which have led to additional reductions in lending rates.
On the other hand, lower electricity demand and higher market uncertainty could lead to higher WACCs .
Some regions also face challenges as sovereign risks increase , and there are signs of commercial banks raising lending margins to compensat e for higher liquidity costs (IEA, 2020 c).
The higher equity risk premi ums reached in the first -half of 2020 could offset the reduction in the debt base rate.
Table 6.1 ⊳ Business models and indicative WACCs of solar PV projects, 2019 Revenue supported (Feed -in tariff, contract for difference, long -term PPA, bilateral agreement ) Merchant risk (Market -based revenue) Europe United States China India Europe China Revenue risk : Price Low Medium Low Low High High Volume Low Medium Medium Medium Medium Medium Off-taker Low Low Medium High - Medium Debt base rate after tax (%) 0.3 1.5 2.4 4.8 0.3 2.4 Debt risk premium after tax (%) 1.9 1.3 1.4 1.8 1.9 1.4 Cost of equity (%) 5.3 - 10.9 4.5 - 7.3 7.0 - 9.0 14.0 - 18.0 10.9 - 14.5 9.0 - 15.1 Share of project debt (%) 75 - 85 55 - 70 70 - 80 70 - 80 40 - 50 40 - 50 WACC nominal, after tax (%) 2.6 - 4.3 3.3 - 5.0 4.4 - 5.4 8.8 - 10.0 6.5 - 9.6 6.4 - 6.9 WACC real, pre- tax (%) 2.4 - 4.0 2.9 - 4.5 3.4 - 3.6 5.0 - 6.6 5.9 - 8.8 4.9 - 8.9 Notes: WACC = w eighted average cost of capital; PPA = power purchase agreement.
Price risk = risk associated to wholesale power prices variations.
Volume risk includes demand risk, curtailment risk and performance risk.
Off -taker risk is that associated with the creditworthiness of the counterpart.
Lower WACCs are also associated with projects in countries with lower systemic risk and more creditworthy off -takers.
For example, the required return on equity in India is around double that in advanced economies, given higher perceived risks stemming from the financial standing of distribution companies (the off -takers in most PPAs), the risk of curtailments of renewable generation ( considered under volume risk in our analysis ) and uncertainties over infrastructure enablers.
In Ch ina, the WACC has declined in part due to reduced volume risk from curtailment as a result of operational improvements and improved grid infrastructure.
For example, curtailment of solar PV in China was around 10% in 2016 (IEA, 2017), and has declined to an average of 2% in 2019 (NEA, 2020) .
In emerging market and developing economies more broadly, efforts to improve system integration of renewables and enhance the financial health of utility purchasers play a critical role in the evolution of financing cos ts.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 237 6 Debt and equity terms have been improved by a combination of factors.
Expansionary monetary policies have driven debt base rates down over the last few years, particularly in Europe.
Supportive solar PV policies, increased lending competition and growing market experience have also helped reduce the debt risk premium for projects and lower the expected returns on equity from investors.
Development banks and non- financial institutions, both domestic and international, have also played a critical role by providing policy advice, establishing initiatives and committing funds to support the development of solar PV at lowest cost.
At the same time, financiers have been willing to lend higher shares of the project cost, with averages rising from 65 -75% in 2015 to 70 -80% in 2019, reflecting both lower technology risks and a push to increase clean energy investments .
As governments and companies set more ambitious climate targets, higher amounts of investments are being devoted to renewable energy projects, addin g to the downward pressure on WACCs.
There are varying degrees of revenue risk within revenue supported models.
The CfD model, which can be either one -sided (France) or two -sided (United Kingdom), provides a high degree of predictability of revenues, but has more volume risk than FiTs or long -term PPAs (e.g.
the one -sided CfD scheme does not apply for periods exceeding six consecutive hours of negative power prices ).
Another variant of the feed -in premium schem e used in Denmark guarantees a premium on top of the wholesale electricity price.
This entails higher risk because of a link to wholesale prices, especially when premiums are small.
In the United States, several business models have gained significant market share, though the majority of projects gene rally take some merchant risk and benefit from the investment tax credit (ITC), which reduces federal tax liability.
Two common business models are the ITC paired with a PPA (more frequent in western US states ) and the sale of electricity in the wholesale market by developers who benefit from ITC and renewable energy certificates.
Financing costs of full merchant projects Solar PV investments with full merchant risk are those where projects are mostly exposed to short -term wholesale prices.
The absence of revenue support mechanisms for projects would lead to much higher financing costs as a result of additional price and volume risks.
These risks would increase the WACC by increasing the cost of equity and by reducing the share of debt in the investment.
We estimate that these additional risks would more than double the WACC for full merchant solar PV projects in Europe and China compared with the WACC for those projects developed under revenue support mechanisms (Table 6.1).
As solar PV marke ts mature and the technology comes to account for a larger portion of electricity supply, it will be increasingly difficult for revenue support mechanisms to be fully maintained.
Therefore, unless policies specify otherwise, market exposure is assumed to increase progressively for new solar PV projects (and all supported technologies) in the WEM, and to approach full merchant risk in the long term.
Full merchant projects have been relatively rare to date.
With falling costs, this model is however becoming more attractive in areas with exceptional resources and relatively high daytime power prices: for example, at least five new merchant solar PV projects moved ahead in Spain in 2019.
In China, "grid -parity" investments refer to projects that solely IEA.
238 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return receive the regional benchmark price of coal -fired power plants.
These projects have priority of dispatch over projects with subsidies, reducing curtailment risk, and they avoid the risk of delayed subsidy payments that has been an ongoing concern for solar PV developers in China .
Market experts suggest this type of project could account for around one-fifth of solar PV additions in China in 2020 and 2021.
In emerging market and developing economies, off -taker risk can be a significant hurdle to solar PV investment, and expanding and strengthening wholesale electricity markets can provide the means to resolve this concern.
Reduced demand stemming from the Covid -19 pandemic is likely to impact final investment decisions (FIDs) for merchant projects in 2020, but the w holesale electricity market reforms underway in a number of markets around the world are likely to enhance the long -term attractiveness of solar PV investment.
Implications for levelised cost of electricity Improvements in technology and low financing costs have made utility -scale solar PV competitive with new coal - and gas- fired generation in major regions around the world.
In the best cases, the LCOE of solar PV d eveloped under revenue support mechanisms can provide electricity at or below $20/MWh: the lowest price seen so far is $13/MWh in Portugal in August 2020.
At these price levels, solar PV is one of the lowest cost sources of electricity in history.
These low costs and widespread support policies over the next decade underpin the market growth for solar PV in the STEPS.
Continuing and expanding revenue support mechanisms for solar PV, wind power and other capital -intensive low emissions technologies are a key measure to accelerate clean energy transitions in the SDS.
As LCOE comparisons can be potent ially misleading across technologies with different operating characteristics, we have undertaken additional analysis of the competitiveness of solar PV using the IEA World Energy Model hourly model of electricity supply to provide the analytical framework for a value -adjusted LCOE (Box 6.3).
In Europe and the United States, applying the WACCs developed for each region combined with the projected capital costs and performance in the STEPS for final investment decisions in 2020 , we calculate that the LCOE o f utility -scale solar PV is $30 -60/MWh (Figure 6.16 ).
These estimates are consistent with the average prices reported in recent auctions in Europe.
On the cost side, the range of solar PV costs is mostly below the LCOE range of new gas -fired power plants.
On the value side, dispatchable gas -fired power plants are able to capture an additional $5 -15/ MWh of market value compared with solar PV in the United States and around $30/MWh in Europe on average over the next 20 years.
When both costs and value are considered, new solar PV under revenue support mechanisms is generally a more cost- effective source of electricity than combined -cycle gas turbines (CCGT s) today.
Work by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) indicates that the construction costs of solar PV in China and India are considerably lower than in Europe or the United States, leading to even lower LCOE for utility -scale projects.
New so lar PV FIDs in 2020 are estimated to have LCOE of $20 -40/MWh under revenue support mechanisms, and these estimates are consistent with recent auction results in both countries.
These costs are entirely below the range of LCOE for new coal -fired power plant s. In fact, these solar PV IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 239 6 costs are in the same range as the operating costs of existing coal -fired power plants in China and India.
On the value side, coal -fired power plants capture an additional $10- 30/MWh of market value compared with solar PV, indica ting a closer competition than one based on costs alone.
Based on this analysis, revenue support mechanisms nevertheless make utility -scale solar PV competitive with coal -fired power generation in China and India for investment decisions taken today.
Figure 6.16 ⊳ Utility-scale solar PV LCOE under revenue support mechanisms, 2020 FID Utility -scale solar PV is now consistently cheaper than new gas - or coal -fired power plants due to technology gains and low financing costs enabled by revenue support mechanisms Notes: FID = f inal investment decision; WACC = w eighted average cost of capital.
Levelised cost of electricity (LCOE) are based on proj ects with FIDs in 2020.
For solar PV, construction costs and capacity factors are projected values in the STEPS for projects completed in 2022, based on historical costs and performance from IRENA (2020), excluding direct financial support.
Solar PV ranges have been ev aluated using WACC ranges from Table 6.1 where applicable.
Lower and upper bounds for CCGT and supercritical coal plants correspond to minimum and maximum LCOE for the technologies in the four focus regions in the STEPS.
Box 6.3 ⊳ A complementary way to compare technologies: the value-adjusted LCOE The LCOE is the most commonly used method of assessing the cost competitiveness of different power generation technologies, and can be applied to technologies with a wide range of technical lifetimes.
Its main strength is that it brings together all the costs directly associat ed with a given technology, including construction, fuel and maintenance costs, and combines them into a single metric.
However, the LCOE does not provide a complete measure of competitiveness: it captures all the direct costs associated with using a particular technology, but it does not take account of impacts on and interactions with the overall power system.
These effects can be described in terms of system costs or the value provided to the system.
40 80 120 Europe United StatesChina India Gas CCGTCoal supercriticalDollars per MWh (2019) Solar PV with revenue support IEA.
240 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return The value -adjusted LCOE (VALCOE), included for the fi rst time in the World Energy Outlook 2018 (IEA, 2018), is a more complete metric of competitiveness for power generation technologies than the LCOE alone, and underpins the capacity additions mechanism in the IEA World Energy Model (WEM).
It was inspired b y emerging academic literature and by real -world market structures and experience, and its development was based on the analytical capabilities of the WEM hourly power supply model.
For each technology, the VALCOE combines a technology's LCOE with the simu lated value of three system services: energy, flexibility and capacity.
Although the VALCOE goes beyond the LCOE and provides a fuller and more accurate measure of cost competitiveness, it is not all -encompassing: it does not yet account for network integr ation and other indirect costs, such as those related to pollution.
Of the three value streams considered in the VALCOE, the energy value is generally the largest, and it varies significantly by technology.
It represents the ability to produce electricity when it is most valuable, and, through the hourly merit order dispatch, is calculated as the average price received for output across the year.
Modelling electricity demand and supply on an hourly basis in the WEM captures the effect of the changing power mix on energy values by technology.
It also captures the contributions of technologies to the adequacy of the system, which are reflected in a technology's capacity value, and the contribution of technologies to the overall functioning of the system, reflected in the VALCOE as a technology's flexibility value.
As the share of variable renewables rises in regions around the world, flexibility is set to become more important.
The VALCOE is most useful when comparing technologies that operate in distinctly different ways.
It is also valuable because it can illustrate that the technology with the lowest LCOE may not be the most competitive in terms of cost effectiveness for the system.
For example, adding storage to solar PV will always increase the LCOE, becaus e the LCOE simply adds in the cost of the storage, whereas the VALCOE takes account of the enhanced ability to match system needs, including peak demand, that pairing storage with solar PV brings.
This could make it a better choice than solar PV on its own for system planners and possibly more profitable for developers.
The VALCOE also provides more complete comparisons between weather -dependent solar PV (and wind power) and dispatchable technologies such as coal - or gas -fired power plants.
Combining cost a nd value is equally important when comparing new investments with existing power plants, and the VALCOE provides a clearer view of whether and when new solar PV would be more cost effective than continuing to operate existing coal - or gas-fired power plant s. As clean energy transitions progress, the importance of looking beyond the LCOE will increase.
Rising shares of variable renewables and continued electricity market reforms mean that the overall competitiveness of power generation technologies will be even more strongly influenced by their operational attributes.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 241 6 6.4 Outlook for flexibility Changes in the shape and variability of electricity demand and the strong growth of solar PV and wind power are together increasing flexibility needs in power systems, and flexibility is rapidly becoming the cornerstone of electricity security.
Flexibility in this context covers a variety of services spanning time scales measured in seconds to hours, days and across seasons.
Hour -to-hour ramping requirements are an impo rtant aspect of flexibility, and they are set to more than double in India over the next decade, while also increasing by 50% in the United States and China.
They are projected to increase in the European Union too, but this is kept to relatively modest levels in part by the number of offshore wind projects with high capacity factors and relatively low variability (IEA, 2019b) (Figure 6.17) .
The extent of rising flexibility needs depends on a large number of factors.
These include: the extent to which wind and solar PV can be deployed in a system -friendly manner; availability of grid capacity; existing network congestion points; profile of electricity dema nd; seasonal weather patterns; the balance of wind and solar PV already in the mix; and the ability of system operators to accurately forecast and control wind and solar PV.
Figure 6.17 ⊳ Power system flexibility needs in selected regions in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2020-2030 Changes in the shape and variability of electricity demand and strong growth of variable solar PV and wind power increase flexibility needs in power systems Note s: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Flexibility needs are represented by the average of the highest 100 hour -to-hour ramping requirements after removing wind and solar production from electricity demand.
Flexibility can be provided from a number of sources, including power plants, electricity networks, storage technologies and demand -response measures.
Conventional power plants have long provided the bulk of power system flexibility, and are set to do so for decades to come (IEA, 2018) .
Coal- fired power plants are the main source of flexibility in 5%10%15%20%25%30% 20 40 60 80 100 120 2020e 2025 2030 2020e 2025 2030 2020e 2025 2030 2020e 2025 2030GWUnited States European Union China India Share of peak demand ( ) IEA.
242 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return many systems today, including China and India, while gas -fired power plants are the primary source in the United States.
Hydropower provides the largest portion of flexibility in other systems, including Brazil, Canada and the European Union.
As flexibility needs increase, hydropower will have greater value to systems for its ability to provide a wide set of system services across a wide range of time scales from improving power quality on a moment -to-moment basis to balancing seasonal variability.
Nuclear power can also provide power system flexibility in some cases and indeed has done so, most notably in France where it provides up to three -quarters of electricity supply.
Investigations and research continue into the ability of nuclear plants to provide flexibility in additional markets.
In the European Union, strengthening interconnections is fast bec oming the central pillar of flexibility.
Electricity networks and energy storage technologies are also critical to the provision of power system flexibility.
6.4.1 Electricity networks Network expansion With around 80 million kilometres (km) of transmission and distribution lines worldwide, electricity networks are the backbone of secure and reliable power systems.
In the STEPS, significant investment takes place in new network capacity between 2019 and 2030 as a result of growing demand for electricity, the addition of new renewable generation capacity and the need to develop smart grids ( Figure 6.18 ).
The expansion of electricity networks to 2030 is about 80% more than over the past decade.
Around 30% of the increase in transmission lines and 20% of the increase in distribution network li nes are attributable to the increase of renewables.
Expansion and refurbishment of electricity networks are undertaken in the STEPS to strengthen the resilience of electricity systems to climate change and extreme weather phenomena, while i nvestment in gri d flexibility helps increas e reliability and security and can reduce the cost of generat ing, transmit ting and distribut ing electricity .
Grid flexibility technologies such as flexible alternating current transmission system s (FACT S) allow increased system flexibility while ensuring an ample supply of reactive power (VAr).
Germany, for example, has identified investment needs over the next ten years of $6-11 billion for the addition of 40 -90 giga VA r of FACTS alone (Netzentwicklungspla n, 2020) .
Much of this expansion and refurbishment will take place in challenging investment climates, and some may face a degree of public opposition.
Lack of infrastructure development can limit the deployment or utilisation of renewables.
In 2019, for example, the German Federal Network Agency proposed t o limit the construction of new onshore wind turbines in northern parts of the country owing to increased congestion on east -west connections (S&P Global, 2019) .
The low density of networks has also caused curtailments of wind and solar PV electricity production.
For example, in the transmission control area of the California Independent System Operator (CAISO), almost 70% of wind and solar PV curtailments in the first eight months of 2020 were related to grid congestion (CAISO, 2020) .
Conversely, increased investment in network technologies such a s ultra-high voltage transmission lines to reduce grid IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 243 6 bottlenecks in China helped reduce renewables curtailment rates from over 15% in 2016 to around 3% in 2019.
Smart grids (those that make use of smart meters, digital substations and sensor c ontrol and operational systems) have a vital role to play in supporting the penetration of variable renewables electricity sources .
They also open the way to more extensive use of tools such as demand -side response measures in order to reduce curtailments of renewabl es electricity production and support the integration of EVs.
Over the next ten years, around 16 million km of existing distribution lines and 1.5 million km of transmission lines need to be replaced or digitalised in the STEPS, together with switching equipment, transformers, meters and other crucial components.
In regions with older power systems, such as the United States and the European Union, roughly one -fifth of current networks need to be replaced or digitalised; this corresponds to 2.7 million km i n the United States and 3.7 million km in the European Union.
More than 60% of global line replacements and new lines are in emerging market and developing economies , with China alone accounting for a third of what is needed (over 7 million km).
Figure 6.18 ⊳ Length of new and replaced electricity network lines by selected region in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Advanced econ omies mainly replace and digitalis e existing grids while elsewhere adding new lines to increase density is the focus in order to support growing demand Note: C & S America = Central and South America.
Investment The drop in short -term revenue for grid operators resulting from lower electricity demand during the Covid -19 crisis has had an impact on network investments, which are set to decline by 6% in 2020 to around $255 billion.
Direct e mployment in manufacturing and construction related to power grids is suff ering as a result .
Policy makers can stimulate grid investment in the short term by raising borrowing limits, providing tax credits, expanding employee caps, and training and skill conversion programmes (IEA, 2020b).
They can 2 4 6China Europe India United States Southeast Asia Africa C & S America Japan Middle East Rest of world Replacement and digitalisation New linesDistribution lines Million km 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Transmission lines Million km IEA.
244 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return stimulate grid investment in t he longer term by defining strategies and multi -year plans to support deployment of electricity infrastructure .
Increased grid investment in the STEPS leads to projected job growth of over 60% by 2022, taking global employment in the manufacturing and cons truction sector to around 2 million jobs.
Governments around the world have announced measures aimed at increasing grid density, and refurbishing and digitalising existing lines.
An infrastructure spending package of $1.5 trillion was proposed in the United States in July 2020, which includes over $70 billion to modernise and extend electricity grid infrastructure to support the deployment of renewables and stimulate the economy.
The European Commission put forward a $2 trillion spending plan in May 2020 to rebuild the economy and put the region on course to achieve ambitions for net -zero greenhouse gas emissions in 2050, including through the use of smart digital infrastructure.
The State Grid Corporation of China has increased the amount of its 2020 f ixed-asset investment plan to $68 billion (CNY 460 billion) from $62 billion (CNY 418.6 billion), of which $3.7 billion (CNY 25 billion) is for smart digital infrastructure (China Daily, 2020).
Investments of this kind will help create more resilient electricity systems, support higher shares of renewables -based generation and electric vehicles and broader use of demand -side response options.
Figure 6.19 ⊳ Annual investment in electricity networks by sector in the Stated Policies Scenario Average investment per year in distribution and transmission networks increases by half over the next decade to support security and the clean energy transition Notes: EV = electric vehicle; 2020e = estimate d values for 2020.
Digital share includes digital grid infrastructure and EV chargers .
In the STEPS , average yearly investments for electricity networks are projected to rise by 50% over the next decade compared to 2019 and by 6 0% compared to 2020, with most of the increase for distribution grids ( Figure 6.19 ).
Cumulative investm ent by 2030 amounts to $2.6 trillion for new lines, about half of which is for the digitalisation and modernisation of 5%10%15%20%25%30%35% 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 2019 2020e 2021-30 2019 2020e 2021-30Billion dollars (2019) Replacement New lines Public EV chargers Share of digital (right axis)Distribution Transmission IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 245 6 existing lines, and about $300 billion to develop the charging infrastructure needed to support growing demand for electric vehicles.
Public charging stations make up the majority of this infrastructure, complemented by private chargers.
In the SDS, investment in electricity networks is 7% higher over the next decade despite lower electricity demand growth, reflecting acceleration of the clean energy transition, electric mobility and digitalisation.
Grid revenue and the Covid- 19 crisis A significant number of countries, representing almost 60% of the global economy, adopted full or partial lockdowns in response to the Covid -19 pandemic.
These lockdowns and the consequent decline in economic activity resulted in electricity demand reductions of 1020% in a number of countries.
In most cases, higher residential demand was outweighed by reduced demand in the industry and services sectors.
Lower demand affected the revenue streams of grid operators, which could have implications for their ability to fund current operations and future investment.
Figure 6.20 ⊳ Recent revenue trends for transmission system operators in selected regions Transmission system operators in many markets experienced a significant decline in revenue during the Covid- 19 crisis Note s: H1 = first -half of the year.
Revenue increased for the TSO in Italy due to an increase in invested capital and revenue associated with quality of service mechanisms in 2019 , partially offset by the negative impact of the volume effect.
Network revenues are generally based on tariffs that are designed to reflect the structure of grid costs , but in many cases they include a variable element related to demand.
These revenues are expected to decline in 2020 reflecting lower electricity demand (Figure 6.20 ), although the extent of this decline will not become clear until financial results for the second -half of 2020 as well as 2021 are available.
Moreover part o f transmission system 8090100110120 2017 2018 2019Index (2017 = 100)Yearly revenue trends -12%-8%-4%0%4% Italy Brazil Canada United States China Germany SpainRevenue change: H1 -2019 vs. H1 -2020 IEA.
246 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return operator ( TSO) (and distribution system operator) revenues are affected by other factors, such as improved quality of service in previous years , creating a lag in the impact on revenue .
Revenue shortfalls owing to unforeseen demand fluctuations for regulated network businesses are generally recovered by higher electricity transmission (and distribution) tariffs in future years.
In some cases regulators may be reluctant to increase rates if economic activity remains low.
In China, for example, the government ordered a 5% tariff cut, and the net profit of Chinese TSOs fell by 60 -80% in the first -half of 2020, compared to first -half 2019.
In India, lockdown measures lowered electricity demand by around 10 -20% year -on-year for several week s. Some TSOs have reported a decline in revenue that is lower than the reduction in electricity demand.
In United States, for example, the decline in revenue is around 3% while the fall in electricity demand has been close to 4%.
Revenues of electricity network operators are also affected by the ability of customers to pay their bills.
In many regions, t he Covid -19-related economic crisis brought significant increases in unemployment and loss of or lower incomes that may adversely affect consumer ability to pay on time or at all.
Some large power customers that connect direct to transmission systems may face difficulties in meeting payment obligations.
Revenue risks of network operators could lead to calls for extended loans and other support mechanisms.
In France, the Réseau de transport d'électricité (Rte) recently issued a prospectus for a EUR 10 billion medium- term note programme (a type of debt security) (Rte, 2020) .
Elsewhere, some grid projects have been suspended or canc elled owing to lack of sufficient revenue and/or a decline in energy demand.
6.4.2 Energy storage Energy storage has long been a central part of power systems, mainly in the form of hydropower reservoirs.
The importance of storage is gaining increased attention as power systems evolve and variable renewables provide a larger portion of electricity supply.
Pumped hydropower facilities had a total capacity of about 160 GW worldwide in 2019 and accounted for more than 90% of global energy storage capacity.
However, given the geographical limitations of suitable pumped storage sites and new large -scale reservoir hydro projects, attention is turning to other options.
Thermal storage and a variety of other technologies are being developed and researched, with battery storage a primary focus.
As of 2019, over 10 GW of batteries are connected to electricity networks.
For the first time in nearly a decade, annual installations of battery storage technologies fell in 2019 , with utility -scale storage installations dropping around 20%.
For the key markets for battery storage, United States and European Union, 2019 was a lacklustre year.
Another key market, Korea, was affected by a series of fires at storage facilities.
On the other hand, 2019 was a watershed year for Australia which saw around 200 megawatts (MW) of energy storage installed.
Further market expansion was on track for 2020, but the Covid -19 crisis is likely to delay battery storage deployment in the near term given temporary factory IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 247 6 shutdowns and supply chain disr uptions.
Utility -scale battery investment growth is expected to slow in 2020 , but this pause is likely to be short -lived given the strong projected growth of renewables and the battery storage market.
Prospects for battery storage systems look set to impro ve as technological innovation advances and new business models emerge.
Battery storage systems are well suited to short -duration storage that involves charging and discharging over a span of hours or days.
This makes them a good partner for variable renewables, and there is a growing trend for battery storage to be paired with solar PV and wind.
Battery storage can also reduce the need for coal and gas -fired peaking plants: major projects announced in the United States, China and Australia aim to reduce peaking requirements.
In India, a recent tender for 1 200 MW of renewables combined with storage led to the award of contracts involving battery storage at $57/MWh, signalling the rapidly improving competitiveness of battery technology.
One of the key reason s for improved competitiveness is the falling costs of lithium- ion battery packs, down 90% from 2010 levels to about $150/kWh in 2019 (BNEF, 2020) .
To further boost prospects for batteries, initiatives such as India's National Mission on Transformative Mobility and Battery Storage and the EU's European Battery Alliance are supporting not only the development of domestic manufacturing capacities, but also markets for both EVs and battery storage.
International partnershi ps such as the Global Battery Alliance also aim to help establish sustainable value chains.
In the STEPS, the massive deployment of batteries in EVs brings about a 40% reduction in current battery pack costs by 2030, and a 50% reduction by 2040.
Global ut ility-scale battery storage capacity is set for a 20 -fold increase between 2019 and 2030, with 130 GW of installed batteries globally projected in the STEPS by 2030 (Figure 6.21) .
The largest market is India, where batteries absorb peak output from solar PV during the day, store it for several hours, and then discharge to help meet electricity demand peaks in the evening.
China and the United States are t he next largest markets for batteries, with 26 GW and 23 GW respectively.
It will be important to monitor the security of supply for various minerals which are needed for both battery storage systems and batteries in EVs, including cobalt, lithium and copp er (Kim and Karpinski , 2020).
The growth of battery storage remains strongly dependent on effective regulations that reflect the value of the flexibility services provided and enable fair access to markets.
The need to properly value the high performance of battery storage systems, including their accurate and fast frequency response, is one aspect of a broader need for wholesale electricity market reform in the face of rapidly evolving power systems.
A number of regulatory barriers which are specific to batteries need to be addressed, including the rates applied to behind- the-meter batteries and the issue of double -charging, where energy storage systems are charged twice for using the grid – once when charging and again when discharging .
These issues are being actively discussed, for example in the European Parliament and in the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Alberta.
248 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return Figure 6.21 ⊳ Battery storage capacity and share of variable renewables in selected regions in the Stated Policies Scenario As the share of variable renewables rises, more flexible resources will be needed; battery storage plays a crucial role in providing fast response and ensuring security of supply 6.4.3 Demand -side response Demand -side response (DSR) can also play an important role in meeting flexibility needs in electricity systems by shifting demand in time, thus helping to facilitate the integration of renewables, reduc e peak demand , maintain system stability, reduce overall costs and CO 2 emissions.
Current use of DSR is concentrated in Europe and North America, where it is primarily focussed on large industrial and commercial electricity users.
The impact of the Covid -19 c risis on industrial and commercial activity reduced DSR potential5 from these sectors in 2020 by 4% relative to 2019 levels, which was offset by a 4% increase in residential potential .
The impact of Covid -19 on DSR potential and use underlines the case for diversifying and expanding DSR to smaller loads and other sectors, including transport and heating.
Digitalisation and automation are critical to tapping DSR potential at low cost in the post -Covid -19 world.
By 2030, global potential for DSR in the STEPS increases by one -third (1 500 TWh), mainly in the buildings sector: residential buildings alone account for 40% of the increased potential (600 TWh).
Although transport accounts for only around 200 TWh of this potential, smart charging of EVs at residences and at workplaces offers a clear DSR opportunity (IEA, 2019a).
5 The DSR potential refers to the aggregate of all flexible loads for a given year, taking into account various parameters such as the ability to remotely shed or control equipment and the extent to which such action is acceptable to end users (IEA, 2016a).
It does not correspond to the readily available DSR resources.
10 20 30 40 0% 10% 20% 30% 40%Battery storage capacity (GW) Share of variable renewables2030 2025 2020 European UnionUnited StatesChinaIndia IEA.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 249 6 6.5 Implications for sustainability 6.5.1 CO 2 and pollutant emissions CO 2 emissions from the power sector are on track to fall b y 7% in 2020 related to the Covid19 crisis, following a 1% decline in 2019, reflecting a drop in coal -fired generation which is being squeezed by lower electricity demand, renewables growth and coal -to-gas switching.
The power sector looks set to emit almost 13 Gt CO 2 emissions in 2020, contributing more than 40% of total global energy -related CO 2 emissions.
By 2021, total electricity generation returns to pre -crisis levels in the STEPS, but a changing fuel mix means that power sector CO 2 emissions increas e only modestly and are then broadly stable to 2030 ( Figure 6.22 ).
They never return to the peak level set in 2018.
Figure 6.22 ⊳ CO 2 emissions and carbon intensity in the power sector in selected regions in the Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions from the power sector rebound after the pandemic but never return to their 2018 peak in the STEPS CO 2 emissions from the power sector are declining in many regions reflecting market conditions, technology innovation and policy support for renewables and efforts to reduce unabated coal -fired generation.
The European Union is set to halve power sector CO 2 emissions from pre -crisis levels by 2030, having put in place ambitious targets for renewables and phasing out coal -fired power in many member states.
This builds on a 30% reduction in power sector CO 2 emissions in the European Union in the 2010 -19 period.
The United States also continues a downward trend, with a one -third reduction by 2030 in the STEPS reflecting support for renewables and challenging market conditions for coal -fired power: this comes on top of a reduction of nearly 30% from 2010 to 2019.
Many emerging market and developing economies in Southeast Asia, the Middle East and elsewhere see continued growth in CO 2 emissions from the p ower sector beyond 2030 in the STEPS.
In China, continued expansion of coal -fired power along with gas, nuclear power and 200 400 600 8001 0001 200 2000 2010 2020 2030g CO2/kWh STEPS SDSEmissions intensity World : 3 6 9 12 15 2000 2010 2020 2030Gt United States European Union China India Southeast Asia Africa Rest of worldCO2emissions IEA.
250 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An un certain return renewables means that power sector emissions plateau and begin to decline around 2030.
India's power sector CO 2 emissions peak around 2035 as solar PV and other renewables come to play an increasingly central part in meeting rising electricity demand (see Box 6.2 ).
As the electrification of energy end -uses increases, reducing the CO 2 emissions intensity of electricity supply becomes even more important in terms of global climate objectives.
The global average carbon intensity of electricity generation in 2020 fell to 440 grammes of CO 2 per kilowatt -hour (g CO 2/kWh), the lowest on record, driven by a fall in the share of generation coming from coal and a rise in the share from renewables.
In the STEPS, the CO 2 emissions intensity of electricity generation drops again by 20% between 2020 and 2030.
In the SDS, the drop increases to 50%.
The power sector is also responsible for a significant portion of air pollutant emissions.
In the STEPS, control technologies adopted in fossil -fuelled power plants and reduced fossil fuel use in most regions reduce power sector emissions by 40% for sulphur dioxide , around 20% for nitrogen oxides and 30% for fine particulate matter by 2030.
This contributes to reducing the air pollution which causes millions of premature deaths annually (IEA, 2016b).
6.5.2 Electricity access In recent years, people gaining access to electricity in emerging market and developing economies has been a major source of increase in global annual electricity demand.6 A cornerstone of sustainability targets and a key focus of the UN Sustainable Development Goal 7 (SDG 7), the global goal of closing the electricity access gap faces major obs tacles as a consequence of the Covid -19 crisis (see Chapter 3).
An initial impact assessment suggests that the number of people without access to electricity may rise by around 2% in 2020 as efforts to expand access fail to keep pace with the growth in population.
In the STEPS, 660 million people remain without access to electricity in 2030 ( Figure 6.23 ), which is around 35 million more than projected und er STEPS in the WEO 2019 .
In 2030, 50% of the global population without access is concentrated in seven countries – Democratic Republic of the Congo (Congo DRC), Nigeria, Uganda, Pakistan, Tanzania, Niger and Sudan.
Despite the slowdown in the near term, in the STEPS an additional 284 million people gain access to electricity by 2030 compared to 2019 levels.
Countries such as Ghana, Kenya, Senegal, Ethiopia and Rwanda lead the progress made and manage to achieve universal access by 2030 through the effective and ambitious policies and programmes they had already put in place prior to the crisis (IEA, 2019 e).
Countries like Nigeria and Indonesia are working to balance the negative effects of the crisis by placing access to electricity at the heart of their economic recovery and stimulus packages.
In Nigeria, the government moved very rapidly during the crisis to connect several key health care centres through mini -grids within 14 days; it also implemented a $620 million plan to provide solar to 5 million households.
6 A full description of the World Energy Outlook energy access definition and methodology can be found at : www.iea.org/articles/defining -energy- access -2019 -methodology.
Chapter 6 | Outlook for electricity 251 6 Figure 6.23 ⊳ Population without access to electricity by main countries and regions in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Without additional policy measures and support, 660 million people remain without access to electricity in 2030; more than 80% of them live in sub -Saharan Africa Note: 2020e = estimate d values for 2020 .
Nevertheless, the uncertainties arising from the Covid -19 crisis pose many risks to progress in gaining access by reducing the ability of households to pay for energy services and weakening the financial situation of governments and energy companies (see Chapter 3).
This already seems to be affecting certain programmes.
For example, in June 2020, due to a lack of funds, the national utility in Uganda announced the suspension of free electricity connections previously provided by the government.
These risks to progress on access would be reduced by immediate and focussed action in Africa and parts of Asia – home to the largest populations without access – to ensure that already designed policies are effectively realised and that suitable additional access measures are designed and implemented in the most acce ss-deficit countries.
This would require large -scale support from the international community, financial institutions and donors.
In the SDS, achieving universal access to electricity by 2030 requires around $35 billion to be spent annually from 2021 to 20 30 on generation and electricity networks through smart and efficient integrated delivery programmes, and making full use of decentralised solutions.
200 400 600 800 2019 2020e 2025 2030Million peopleRest of world Other developing Asia Pakistan Other sub-Saharan Africa Tanzania Ethiopia Nigeria Congo DRC IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 253 Chapter 7 Outlook for fuel supply Knocked down, but will they get up again?
• The effects of the Covid -19 pandemic have put a strain on fuel markets and exacerbated many of the longer term challenges facing fuel suppliers.
As demand has declined, a significant excess supply capacity has appeared in all markets, with little certainty on how quickly this overhang will be absorbed.
Investment budgets are strained, prices are lower, and investors are looking at the fossil fuel sector with increased scepticism, driven by concerns about financial returns and uncertainty around demand, and also by doubts about business models against a backdrop of growing social and environmental pressures in many countries.
Figure 7.1 ⊳ Global fuel supply by scenario, 2010-2040 Two key uncertainties for fuel producers are the shape of the recovery from the pandemic and the strength of the push for reductions in global emissions • In oil markets, the recovery in demand in the Stated Policies Scenario ( STEPS) requires that upstream investment picks up from the low point in 2020, underpinned by a rise in the oil price to $75/barrel by 2030.
However, it is not clear whether this investment will come in time and, if it does come, where it will com e from.
The US tight oil sector has been the main engine of supply growth in recent years, but it was fuelled by easy credit that has now dried up.
Meanwhile conventional producers are also feeling huge strains from the collapse in prices and revenues.
I nventories are high and markets are well supplied in the near term, but the prospects for continued ample supply to meet the projected demand rebound in STEPS over the period to 2030 should not be taken for granted.
1 0002 0003 0004 0005 000 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040MtoeSTEPS SDSCoal Natural gasOil Low -carbon fuelsSU MMARY IEA.
254 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return • In the STEPS, US tight oil output returns to 2019 levels by 2022, while the prospects for conventional producers also depend on their resilience to the effects of the crisis.
Low cost producer countries with larger financial buffers, such as Saudi Arabia, Russia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirat es, are better placed to weather the storm.
Other producers, such as Iraq, Angola and Nigeria, face acute fiscal difficulties and struggle in the STEPS to mobilise upstream investment.
• Refinery throughput grows at only half the pace seen in the last decad e, and refineries are further challenged by a structural shift in oil use away from transport fuels and towards petrochemical feedstock .
The widening gap between capacity and demand for refined products puts huge pressure on older and less competitive refineries.
Hedging strategies for refiners include diversification into petrochemical and low -carbon businesses; these strategies become even more essential in the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) .
• This year's projections for natural gas in t he STEP S see a 2% downward revision in 2030 demand compared with the 2019 projections, similar to oil but much smaller than the downward revisions to 2030 demand for coal (9%).
S hale gas production in the United States bounces back relatively quickly in this Outl ook, but Qatar and Russia are also w ell placed for supply growth, given their vast reserves of low cost supplies .
• Global gas markets remain amply supplied until the mid -2020s in the STEPS, maintaining downward pressure on prices during a period in which around 150 bcm of LNG contracts worldwide are due to expire.
A delayed recovery from the pandemic cuts into near -term demand for LNG, while the downside case over the longer term arises from stronger climate policies.
In the STEPS, new LNG projects get the go-ahead to start operation before 2030 to meet rising demand for internationally traded gas, but these are not required in the SDS.
• Lower demand exerts sustained pressure on the coal supply industry.
International coal trade is further squeezed by efforts to boost domestic output in China and India – the two largest coal importing countries.
India is the only country that sees growth in coal production in the STEPS, with Australia and Russia faring better than the other exporters.
The SDS intensifies the p ressure on all coal suppliers .
• Renewable solid biomass, liquid biofuels and biogases grow steadily in the STEPS thanks to various mandates and targets, underlining that policy support is a critical variable for low -carbon fuels, especially in a lower fossil fuel price environment.
Today's levels of spending and investment need to rise to deliver the policies announced by governments that are reflected in the STEPS; they would need to rise much further to deliver the more ambitious goals of the SDS.
• Low-carbon hydrogen is rising in importance in many energy transition strategies, and several countries are accelerating efforts to scale up infrastructure, demand and expertise.
Bridging the cost gap with competing fuels is a key near -term challenge, but the gap is projected to narrow considerably by 2030.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 255 7 7.1 Introduction The Covid -19 pandemic has shaken up the outlook for fuels, forcing producers to cope with greater uncertainty than ever before.
The sharp fall in demand and prices in 2020 has meant extreme financial stress for many companies engaged in fuel supply, and especially for those that came into the crisis in a relatively weak position.
It has also, in many countries, intensified pressures on the industry not just to deliver fuels but also to play a more significant role in reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
Some major elements of the oil and gas supply chain have been hit particularly hard by the downturn.
The US shale industry has met nearly 60% of the increase in global oil and gas demand over the last ten years, but this growth was largely fuelled by debt and investors were already feeling frustrated by the industry's weak record on generating positive free cash flow before the crisis.
As market conditions worsened and credit dried up, bankr uptcies among pure -play shale companies rose: as of the end of August, they were 50% higher in 2020 than in the same period in 2019.
Financial pressures have also led to major layoffs in the global oilfield supply and services industry, and massive strains on countries that rely heavily on hydrocarbon revenue, such as Iraq and Nigeria.
This has undermined the ability of major producer economies to provide essential services to their populations and squeezed the funds available for continued investment in th e energy sector.
The Covid -19 pandemic raises a host of questions that are difficult to answer categorically.
As always, none of our scenarios should be considered as a forecast.
But there is no doubt that the ground has shifted as a result of the crisis, mostly in ways that leave suppliers of oil, gas and coal in a more precarious and uncertain situation.
This is the third major price downturn for fossil fuels in just over a decade.
Bouncing back will be tougher than in the past, not least because of continued reductions in the cost of some key renewable technologies.
All fuel markets in this Outlook start in a state of oversupply, with little clarity as to how quickly demand might recover or when new investment will be required.
The engine of recent oil supply growth – US shale – has stalled, but the strains on many conventional producers mean that many are in poor shape to step up their own activity.
In natural gas markets, the record year for liquefied natural gas (LNG) project approvals in 2019 promises to prolong a period of well -supplied markets and complicates considerably the prospects for other major investments.
The questions on the demand side loom largest for coal, especially for those engaged in international trade: all of the big importing countries are looking to limit coal use for policy reasons, to prioritise domestic output where possible, or to do both.
The pandemic is set to have lasting implications for company strategies and the industry landscape.
These vary by fuel and region, but a common denominator is that – in contrast to the aftermath of previous downturns – capital markets are not in the mood to step in Figures and tables from this chapter are accessible through your IEA account : .
256 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return and bankroll the next wave of projects.
Instead, they are approaching many fossil fuel investments with caution, particularly those that are carbon -intensive or have long payback periods.
Some pressures may ease as and when prices pick up and projects offer better potential returns, but financing constraints in some parts of the world are becoming structural, as is the difficulty of securing permitting and public acceptance for new infrastructure.
In coal, the crisis is accelerating the move by many diversified mining companies to leave the coal business altogether.
In the oil and gas sector, a degree of industry consolidation is likely as weake r players exit the scene, and that could well be accompanied by fierce competition for assets that combine low costs with relatively low- carbon intensity.
However, there is little consensus on what combination of scale, resources, operational capabilities and technologies represents a winning formula.
Perceptions of where future value lies vary widely.
Some companies are doubling down on traditional areas of strength, while others are diversifying into lower carbon fuels, other commodities or clean energy technologies.
These strategies ultimately represent a judgement call about the type of energy world that will emerge from today's crisis.
Whichever way things evolve, fuels of various kinds will be essential to the future of energy.
The 20% share of electr icity in global final consumption is growing, but electricity cannot carry the energy system transition on its own against a backdrop of rising demand for energy services.
For the applications that electricity cannot reach, the critical question is whether the industry can find ways to deliver the energy system benefits of hydrocarbons, but without the GHG emissions ( Box 7.1 ).
Box 7.1 ⊳ Do environmental, social and governance factors spell a changed outlook for oil and gas?
An increased emphasis by governments and investors on environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors is having a visible impact on the strat egies of some large publicly listed oil and gas companies.
Over the last two years, these companies have made a range of pledges regarding their environmental performance.
These pledges are mainly concerned with the emissions directly arising from company operations, but in some cases they apply to end -use emissions as well, i.e.
those that arise when consumers use the fuels.
How might these commitments affect the future of oil and gas supply?
The most direct impact will be on the emissions associated with getting oil and gas out of the ground and to consumers.
These account for as much as 15% of all energy -related GHG emissions – a similar amount to all emissions from the United States.
There are costeffective opportunities to reduce these emissions by preventing methane from leaking to the atmosphere, eliminating routine flaring, improving efficiency and integrating renewable sources of power and heat.
The companies making ESG commitments are generally among the better performers on these metrics.
Their ab ility to secure far -reaching reductions lies not only in their IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 257 7 own operations but also in other ventures in which they are involved.
For example, of the 60 million tonnes (Mt) of methane leaks from oil and gas operations which we consider it is technically possible to abate, only a relatively small share comes from assets operated by the oil and gas m ajors1 (IEA, 2020 a).
However, that percentage more than doubles if we consider all assets, including non -operated joint ventures, in which these oil and gas ma jors have some stake ( Figure 7.2).
The Oil and Gas Climate Initiative (OGCI) similarly offers scope to participating companies to press for action on methane leaks in respect of all assets in which they have an interest.
Figure 7.2 ⊳ Estimated technically avoidable methane emissions for selected companies by type of asset, 2019 Partnerships are very common in the upstream industry, and they can be crucial to spread best practices on emissions abatement Notes: Mt = million tonnes.
OGCI includes the oil and gas majors, except ConocoPhillips, plus CNPC, Equinor, Occidental Petroleum, Petrobras, Repsol and Saudi Aramco.
ESG commitments may also influence the types of resources that are developed.
Companies are increasingly likely to seek out sources of oil and gas that offer lower emissions intensities, especially if investors and consumer markets also start to differentiate between hyd rocarbons based on their lifecycle emissions.
This is particularly the case for those companies that have also made more far -reaching pledges that address end- use emissions.
Any concerted move to bring down this category of emissions, called "scope 3" emissions, implies some combination of measures to reduce emissions intensities, to dilute the share of fossil fuels in the energy marketed by the companies concerned, and to capture or offset a portion of remaining end-use emissions.
1 The oil and gas majors include BP, Chevron, ExxonMobil, Shell, Total, ConocoPhillips and Eni.
5 10 15 20 25 Operated assetsAssets with any interestOperated assetsAssets with any interestMt Oil Natural gasMajors OGCI IEA.
All rights reserved.258 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Remaking oil and gas comp anies as "energy companies" is a huge strategic shift and satisfying investor expectations on profits as well as emissions during this process will not be easy.
Commitment to such a transformation is most likely where companies are convinced that policy makers and societies are intent on reducing dependence on fossil fuels.
That is a key reason why, for the moment, these types of pledges have been concentrated among European -based companies, e.g.
BP, Eni, Repsol, Shell and Total.
7.2 Oil supply 7.2.1 Upstream Impacts of the Covid- 19 pandemic The pandemic has brought three major changes to our oil market outlook: greater uncertainty over the outlook for demand; a significant reduction in equilibrium prices; and increased financial pressures on the industry.
Rising concerns over the compatibility of oil with environmental objectives – as highlighted, for example, by the increase in investorrelated climate resolutions (IEA, 2020a) and recent announcements on sustainability requirements from large investment funds – are also having a growing impact on the longterm prospects for oil supply.
Oil companies are adapting their investment strategies and priorities.
With more constrained access to capital from markets and reduced revenues, especially for shale-fo cused independent oil companies and national oil companies in producer economies, investment plans are much less certain than in the past.
That has implications for future supply.
If demand were to remain subdued for a prolonged period or if energy transitions were to accelerate, as in the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS), there would be few risks to the adequacy of oil supply.
However, a recovery in oil demand would create much greater risks of price volatility.
Demand does recover in the Stated Pol icies Scenario (STEPS); although it takes until 2023 to return to 2019 levels (see Chapter 5).
It then grows by around 750 thousand barrels per day (kb/d ) per year through to 2030 and subsequently by less than 100 kb/d per year during the 2030- 40 period.
This low level of demand growth means that almost all of the investment required in the future in the STEPS – and 100% of the investment in the SDS – is simply to compensate for the declines in output from existing fields ( Figure 7.3).
Although demand in the STEPS revives to levels relatively close to the pre -Covid outlook in the World Energy Outlook -2019 ( WEO -2019) , the same is not true for oil prices, which are 15% below that Outlook .
This is due in part to our view that costs have been reset at a lower level by the crisis.
It also reflects an assumption that in this scenario major conventional resource -holders act to prevent prices from reaching levels that trigger either a return to very rapid growth in US tight oil production or that provoke a faster substitution away from oil by consumers.
All rights reserved.Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 259 7 Figure 7.3 ⊳ Global oil demand by scenario and declines in supply from 2019 Oil demand flattens (in STEPS) or declines (in SDS), but continued upstream investment is still needed to offset declines from existing oil fields Note: mb/d = million barrels per day.
This lower oil price outlook brings the financial performance of the industry into sharper focus: expectations of future cash flows in the STEPS have been revised down, mirroring the actual asset write-d owns that have been announced by a number of companies (Box 7.2) .
The lower price outlook also increases the strains on countries that rely heavily on hydrocarbon revenue; the extent to which different producer economies have been weakened by the crisis is a crucial variable in our projections.
Box 7.2 ⊳ Company asset write-downs: a response to today's crisis or to tomorrow's transition?
A number of international oil and gas companies have recently reduced the reported value of their assets, providing a very tangible expression of uncertainty over future prospects.
Chevron initiated the trend in December 2019 and was followed by BP, Shell, Eni and Total.
Together t hey have written down over $50 billion, representing around 515% of each company's market capitalisation at the time of the write -downs.
The assets concerned were mostly unconventional oil and gas resources, deepwater projects, LNG infrastructure and refining assets.
Not all companies have announced similar revisions to the value of their assets, but it is possible to examine the different factors at play by comparing the discounted value of future net income for publicly listed oil and gas companies across different scenarios.
The effect of the pandemic can be assessed by comparing how this indicator has changed in this edition from the pre -Covid STEPS in the WEO -2019 .
This shows a reduction of around 17% (Figure 7.4) .
20 40 60 80 100 120 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040mb/d Additional new fields in the STEPS Supply with no new investmentNew fields in the SDS Supply with investment in existing fields IEA.
260 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return  The effects of enhanced efforts to a ddress climate change can be assessed by comparing the difference in this indicator between the 2020 STEPS and the SDS.
This shows a further reduction of around 30%.
We would classify this downside risk as "stranded value", i.e.
a reduction in anticipated future revenue attributable to enhanced climate policy ( IEA, 2020 a).2 In practice, the reduction in market capitalisation for publicly listed oil and gas companies over the last year (from mid -2019 to mid -2020) has been close to 40%.
If one assumes that the market value of listed oil and gas companies is roughly equivalent to the net present value of their future net income, this could imply that markets have priced in not just the impact of the pandemic but also a significant future tightening of climate policies.
Figure 7.4 ⊳ Estimated present value of future upstream net income for publicly listed companies by scenario to 2040 Comparing the net income for publicly listed oil and gas companies across the scenari os highlights the uncertainties that affect their present -day valuations Notes: Net income is projected revenue minus finding and development costs, operating costs and government taxes, discounted at 10 %.
Prices, production volumes and costs vary according to scenario.
The pre -cr isis value is represented by the WEO -2 019 Stated Policies Scenario projection.
Oil supply outlook to 2030 In the STEPS, upstream spending climbs steadily from the low point reached in 2020, responding to a rise in the oil price to just over $70/barrel in 2025.
Given the recovery in oil consumption in this scenario, this price rise is necessary to allow for a s mooth match between demand and supply.
This assumes that attempts at market management led by 2 Stranded assets are sometimes also assessed in terms of stranded volumes (when resources slated for development remain in the ground) and stranded capital (when oil and gas projects do not recover the capital invested in them).
These various definitions are distinct but often used interchangeably, which confuses discussions about the potential value of losses resulting from climate change policy.
1 2 3 4Trillion dollars (2019) Pre-crisis Stated Policies Scenario Sustainable Development ScenarioOil Natural gas IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 261 7 the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) are maintained and that individual producers avoid the temptation to "open the taps" to secure additional shortterm income.
In practice, this is a very delicate balancing act.
Uncertainty over the shape of the economic recovery from Covid -19 makes it very difficult for oil producers to know what investment and policy approach to follow.
Many producers are also facing headwinds from the oil price drop and may be unable to increase investment in practice without first securing additional revenue.
Under these circumstances, the possibility of a mismatch between supply and demand is ever present, with all tha t this implies for market volatility.
It is also possible that the oil price could remain lower than projected in the STEPS, for example if the global resource base continues to grow and the industry can keep control of costs, or if supply constraints rela ted to conflict (e.g.
Tight oil has provided a shock absorber for oil markets in recent years, but it is not clear whether, and if so when, it will be in a position to continue this role (Spotlight).
This uncertai nty creates dilemmas for other producers in the STEPS.
Because of its short investment cycle, the response time for tight oil to market signals has been in the range of 6-12 months.
Conventional projects have shortened considerably their time to market (from final investment decision to first oil) but this still averages around three years (IEA, 2019) .
If demand recovers and tight oil for whatever reason does not, conventional producers may struggle to bridge the gap.
Tight oil 2.0: how might shale be different after Covid -19?
The rise of tight oil was underpinned by small and mid -size independent players, and largely underwritten by huge amounts of debt financing.
Under pressure from investors, there were signs in early 2020 that the shale se ctor as a whole might finally report modest positive free cash flow, but these expectations were upended by the pandemic.
Instead, the story of 2020 has been one of bankruptcies, layoffs, shut -ins and cuts in investment.
Tight oil (crude plus condensate) r emains a force to be reckoned with in global oil supply, but the shale industry post -Covid will not be the same as the one that we have seen so far.
The influence of large players is set to grow as acreage is consolidated by larger industry players, and the focus on growth is set to be supplanted over time by a focus on returns and on securing and maintaining a social licence.
The exuberance and breakneck growth of the early years may be replaced by something a little steadier.
In our modelling of tight oil in th is Outlook , the lower oil price view in the STEPS is a major factor affecting the projections; so too is the higher assumed size of the resource base, based on the latest numbers from the US Energy Information Administration .3 The 3 The remaining technically recoverable resource base for US tight oil (crude plus condensate) has been revised upward to almost 200 billion barrels from 155 billion barrels in the WEO -2019.
The resource numbers are based on the most recent estimate for each play from the US EIA (US DOE/EIA, 2020) .
262 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return cost of capital is another particularly important variable.
For many companies, the drop in the oil price triggered not just lower revenue but also lower credit ratings.
This translates into higher borrowing costs for many operators – especially those exposed to the high -yield bond market – as well as reductions in reserves -based lending assessments and in the funding available to fund future drilling efforts.
We estimate that the debt weighted average cost of capital for tight oil operators has risen from around 8% in recent years to over 12% in 2020, which translates into an increase in unit cost of about $5/barrel.
The net effect in our projections in the STEPS is that tight oil returns to the production levels of 2019 by 2022, and remains slightly below the levels project ed in the WEO -2019 through to 2040.
However, there is a high degree of uncertainty, and much depends on the amount of investment mobilised by the industry.
This has fluctuated wildly in recent years.
Investment in US tight oil was just less than $125 billion at its highest point in 2014 before falling to less than $40 billion in 2016 in the wake of the oil price crash.
It then recovered to around $100 billion in 2018 -19, but is again expected to fall to around $45 billion in 2020.
Figure 7.5 ⊳ Differences in US tight crude and condensate production at various levels of average annual investment to 2030 Shale resources are large, but a key post -Covid uncertainty is whether the industry is able to secure financing for their development In the STEPS, average annual investment over the next ten years in US tight oil is projected to be around $85 billion, just less than the levels seen before the pandemic.
However, such a rebound is far from assured.
If capital markets were to remain closed to shale operators for a prolonged period, and if operators were to use cash flow to pay back debt rather than reinvest in production, investment could remain much closer to the levels seen in 2020.
If annual average investment were to remain around $45 billion 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030mb/d$125 billion $105 billion STEPS $65 billion $45 billion IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 263 7 for the next ten years, then by 2030 production would be nearly 3 million barrels per day (mb/d) lower than in th e STEPS (Figure 7.5).
Conversely, if some of the oil majors were to focus more investment on their tight oil operations, or if there were to be a higher oil price rebound, it is possible that investment could climb towards the level seen in 2014.
If average annual investment to 2030 were to be $125 billion, then production would be around 1.5 mb/d higher than in the STEPS .
Among the main conventional producers, many are feeling acute strains from the effect of lower oil prices.
Economies that rely heavily on oil and gas revenues and have only limited "rainy day" foreign reserves, such as Iraq, Nigeria and Angola, are facing difficult choices about how to allocate scarce financial resources.
Reduced revenues threaten government investment in production, given the difficulty of reducing spending in essential areas such as education and health care, lower oil price also make it harder to secure foreign investment; and the result is that these countries could struggle to increase production .
In the STEPS, aggreg ate production from these three countries falls slightly between 2019 and 2030, a sharp contrast to the last ten years and to the growth projected in the WEO -2019 .
There is also profound uncertainty over the outlook for resource -rich countries such as Iran, Libya and Venezuela, where economic pressures are accompanied by sanctions or political instability.
Production in Libya and Iran could probably rebound relatively quickly with a change of circumstances (production from these countries has fallen by aro und 2.3 mb/d since 2018).
It would take longer for production to recover in Venezuela given chronic underinvestment in recent years.
The producers that are better able to cope with low prices include Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Russia.
Although these countries are also facing acute economic pressures and retrenchment in public spending, bigger financial buffers give them more room for manoeuvre.
In Russia, companies have also been sheltered somewhat by a devaluation of the rouble and by a tax system that reduces duties on producers in line with oil prices.
Key producers have still announced large cuts in capital expenditure: Saudi Aramco, for example, has said that it plans to cut investment in 2020 by as much as 25% from the $33 billion spent in 2019, raising questions about the development timelines for some major expansion projects such as those at the Marjan and Berri fields.
Overall, however, this group of countries is projected to expand output to 2030 at a slightly faster rate than in the WEO -2019 or, in the case of Russia, to slow the projected fall in production ( Figure 7.6).
Among other producers, the drop in the oil price puts higher cost mature basins at a considerable disadvantage.
Production in China and parts of Southeast Asia has been in decline for a number of years, as has onshore conventional production in countries including the United States.
With limited new production and investment prospects, these rates of decline continue in the STEPS over the period to 2030.
An important consideration for these countries is how to decommission old assets and infrastructure safely to avoid environmental damage, especially if current operators go bankrupt.
264 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Figure 7.6 ⊳ Indicators of financial resilience and changes in production for selected producer economies in the Stated Policies Scenario Diversified sources of revenue and a degree of resilience against the financial impacts of the oil price slump are key variables in assessing the outlook for oil production Note s: UAE = United Arab Emirates.
Non -oil revenue excludes revenue from both oil and natural gas production .
Sources: IEA analysis based on IM F (2020) and Bank of Russia (2020).
Investment may also be constrained in new capital -intensive projects with relatively long lead times, for example in deepwater areas.
In the STEPS, production grows globally over the next five years as deepwater projects in Brazil and Guyana that are currently under construction start to come online.
Deepwater production growth then stagnates as the pace of growth slows in Latin American countries, and new capacity is offset by declines in more mature areas such as the Gulf of Mexico, Nigeria and Angola.
Extra -heavy oil and bitumen projects are very capital intensive and, in Canada, they face increasing challenges related to pipeline export infrastructure.
In the STEPS, production in Canada rises to 3.5 mb/d in 2025 as projects and pipelines (including the Trans Mountain Expansion) that are currently under construction are completed, but there is limited growth thereafter ( Figure 7.7).
In summary, inventories are high and markets are well supplied in the near term, but the prospects for continued ample supply in the STEPS over the period to 2030 should not be taken for granted.
Conventional producers, for better or worse, have become used to a world in which US tight oil picks up a lot of the slack in oil supply.
If that were to change, and if US production were to remain flat at 2019 levels throughout the 2020s, then production from elsewhere would need to increase by an additional 4.3 mb/d over and above the STEPS projections to meet dem and levels.
Given the huge financial pressures today in many resource -rich countries and investor apathy elsewhere, there is not a long Russia Kuwait AlgeriaUAESaudi Arabia QatarIran Oman AngolaIraqNigeria 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Non-oil revenue as share of fiscal revenue (2019)Changes in production, 2019 -30 -1 1 mb/d0International reserves to debt (2020)WEO-2019WEO-2020 WEO-2019WEO-2020 WEO-2019WEO-2020 IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 265 7 list of candidates to step in.
There is no shortage of resources, but there is a distinct possibility that the supply si de may be losing appetite for oil faster than the world's consumers.
Figure 7.7 ⊳ Oil production by type and region in the Stated Policies Scenario Amid uncertainties on demand, attempts at market management face a delicate balance between prices that generate sufficient revenue and those that provoke a rebound in shale Note: NGLs = natural gas liquids; EHOB and other = extra -heavy oil and bitumen, kerogen, coal- to-liquids, gas-to-liquids and additives.
Longer term dynamics Looking beyond 2030, the projections in the STEPS highlight a number of potential inflection points.
Demand reaches a plateau that is a long way from the declining demand trajectory in the SDS, but nonetheless puts it at a point where relatively small shifts in policy or technology could put it on a downward trajectory.
US tight oil production reaches a high point in the early 2030s and then starts to decline as the most productive well sites are exhausted.
There is some modest growth in tight oil production outside the United States, reaching 2 mb/d in 2040, led by increases in Argentina and Canada.
There is growth in some other non -OPEC countries: for example, total oil production grows by 0.8 mb/d in Mexico between 2030 and 2040 as deepwater production starts to pick up.
The United States remains the largest oil producer in the STEPS through to 2040 (Figure 7.8).
However , by the 2030s the gap with Saudi Arabia starts to narrow, with total US production falling by over 2 mb/d between 2030 and 2040, while Saudi Arabia is on a gradual upward path.
Saudi Arabia and other members of OPEC are some of the main sources of production growth in the STEPS after 2030; aggregate OPEC production increases by 3 mb/d between 2030 and 2040.
10 20 30 40 50 60 2010 2020 2030mb/d Onshore conventional Shallow water Deepwater NGLs Tight oil EHOB and otherOPEC and Russia 2010 2020 2030Other non -OPEC IEA.
266 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Figure 7.8 ⊳ Top-12 oil producing countries in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019 and 2040 The United States remains the largest global oil producer in 2040 in the STEPS, while S audi Arabia is the largest source of growth Note: UAE = United Arab Emirates; NGLs = natural gas liquids; EHOB and other = extra -heavy oil and bitumen, kerogen, coal- to-liquids, gas- to-liquids and additives.
While there is limited growth in oil demand after 2030, around $390 billion in annual investment is stil l needed in upstream oil projects.
Less than 10% of this is required to meet the 0.9 mb/d increase in oil demand in the 2030 -40 period: the rest is necessary to sustain production in existing fields and develop new fields to offset declines in existing sou rces of production.
In total, around 55% of upstream investment in the STEPS is required to develop new fields and 45% is required to maintain production at existing assets.
The contrast between oil market outcomes in the STEPS and SDS is stark.
In the SD S, oil demand falls by more than 11 mb/d in the 2019 -30 period, and stands nearly 17 mb/d below the level of the STEPS in 2030.
Although it is assumed that members of OPEC seek to restrain production to support prices, lower demand means that prices never rise above $60/barrel through to 2030.
The lower price level reduces output from many non -OPEC sources of supply, for example, with US tight oil production nearly 2 mb/d lower in 2030 in the SDS than in the STEPS.
Total non -OPEC production is around 11 mb/ d lower in the SDS than in the STEPS in 2030, while OPEC production is around 5.5 mb/d lower.
There is further oil demand decline in the SDS of around 20 mb/d between 2030 and 2040.
Most of the decline in supply comes from non -OPEC countries, which collect ively fall by more than 13 mb/d over this period, although there are also large declines in production in a number of OPEC countries.
Around 70% of the decline over this period comes from onshore sources of production.
Despite the rapid fall in demand, the even faster decline in production from existing fields means that investment in upstream oil projects in the SDS remains around $ 220 billion each year during this period.
5 10 15 20United States Saudi Arabia Russia Canada Iraq UAE China Iran Kuwait Brazil Mexico Qatar Onshore conventional Shallow water Deepwater NGLs Tight oil EHOB and other2019 mb/d 5 10 15 202040 mb/d IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 267 7 7.2.2 Refining Impact of the Covid- 19 pandemic Before the crisis, the refining industry was already feeling pressure from slowing demand growth and expanding excess capacity, but there were relatively high expectations for 2020.
Refiners were anticipating a spike in diesel demand arising from new environmental regulations for the shipping ind ustry from the International Maritime Organization, but the anticipated boost to margins never arrived.
The pandemic caused a significant reduction in demand for international shipping and there were ample supplies of fuels that met the requirements of the new regulations.
Instead, the industry had to cope with a historic collapse in demand for other transport fuels that disproportionately affected the most lucrative products such as gasoline, diesel and jet fuel.
This weighed heavily on margins and dragged utilisation rates down to the lowest levels in 35 years.
Instead of providing respite, 2020 has forced the refining industry to confront some deep structural problems.
The key structural issue is the widening gap between refining capacity and the demand for refined products.
A surge in investment in recent years meant that more than 2 mb/d of new refining capacity came online in 2019, the highest level since 2010, and well ahead of demand growth.
This imbalance is set to persist: more than 6 mb/d of new capacity is scheduled to start operation over the period to 2025, while demand – even in the relatively upbeat world of the STEPS – is only 2 mb/d higher by 2025 than the level seen in 2019.
The pressures on the refining industry would intensify sharply in the SDS.
Figure 7.9 ⊳ Changes in oil product demand by type and call on refineries in the Stated Policies Scenario A marked shift in demand away from transport fuels towards petrochemical feedstock underpins a 50% reduction in the pace of demand growth for refined products Notes: Transport fuels include gasoline, diesel and kerosene.
Petrochemical feedstocks include ethane, LPG and naphtha.
Call on refineries excludes the portion supplied by natural gas liquids, coal -to-liquids, gas- toliquids and additives as well as direct use of crude oil.
-8-404812 2010-19 2019-30 2010-19 2019-30 2010-19 2019-30mb/d Transport fuels Petrochemical feedstocks Other Call on refineriesAdvanced economies Emerging market and developing economiesWorld IEA.
268 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return There are additional challenges that arise from changing patterns of product demand.
With rising demand for electric vehicles and slowing overall car sales growth, the period of fuelcentric growth is slowly drawing to a close.
Total oil demand does not peak definitively in the STEPS within the projection horizon to 2040, but there is a notable shift in the balance between transport fuels and petrochemical feedstock ( Figure 7.9).
The growth rate for transport fuels falls sharply between 2019 and 2030, compared with the 2010s, whereas the reduction in growth for products used as petrochemical feedstock (ethane, liquefied petroleum gas [LPG] and naphtha) is more modest.
Market share for refiners is squeezed even further by the fact that an increasing share of oil products (mostly those used as petrochemical feedstock) bypasses the refining system altogether, primarily because they are sourced from NGLs.
The average annual growth of oil products produced via the refining system (the call on refineries in Figure 7.9) is 50% lower between 2019 and 2030 in the STEPS than in the previous decade.
Outlook for refining The growing mismatch between refining capacity and demand for refined produ cts raises particularly difficult questions for older and less competitive refineries.
Traditional refiners, mostly in advanced economies, continue to lose market share in the STEPS to those in other parts of the world that benefit from proximity to growing demand or cheap feedstock.
By 2030, some 14% of today's refining capacity in advanced economies faces the risk of lower utilisation or closure.
In the SDS, this share rises to 24% in 2030 and over 50% in 2040.
Figure 7.10 ⊳ Refinery runs and capacity at risk in selected regions in the Stated Policies Scenario Emerging refiners in Asia and the Middle East strengthen their position in the global refining market, putting greater pressure on traditional refineries in advanced economies Notes: C & S America = Central and South America.
Capacity at risk is the difference between refinery capacity and refinery runs, with the latter including a 14% allowance for downtime.
Projected shutdowns beyond those publicly announced are also counted as capacity at risk.
5 10 15 15 30 45 TR ER LM TR ER LM TR ER LM mb/dmb/d United States Europe Japan and Korea Russia China India Other Asia Middle East C & S America AfricaTraditional refiner (TR): Emerging refiner (ER): Late mover (LM): Capacity at risk (right axis)2019 2030 2040 IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 269 7 Meanwhile, emerging market and developing economies in Asia and the Middle East continue to add capacity and strengthen their presence in the global refining industry.
These regions account for two -thirds of global refining investment over the past five years, and for more than 80% of refining capacity currently under construction (IEA, 2020b).
By 2030, these emerging refiners take over from tra ditional refiners as the largest global refining centres ( Figure 7.10 ).
Other regions with a growing appetite for oil do not follow the same path.
The investment cases for new refineries in Central and South America and Africa have weakened considerably, despite their positions as net product importers, not least because this new capacity would face fierce competition from existing refiners seeking export outlets.
Less competitive traditional refiners had already been gr appling with mounting competitive pressures, but the pandemic has increased the urgency of the need to adapt to a new market environment.
Responses will vary depending on the specific circumstances of each refinery.
Some are likely to choose or be pushed t o close operations, but there are also two other possibilities:  Some refiners may make a bet on petrochemicals, via "refining petrochemical integration".
The first wave of integrated facilities (e.g.
Hengli and Zhejiang phase 1 in China) started operations in 2019 and showed resilience during the crisis.
While companies need to withstand a period of capacity overhang in the petrochemical market, some players with deep pockets may well pursue this pathway with the strategic aim of securing long -term competitiveness.
For example, plans for several plants that convert crude oil directly into chemicals have recently been announced in China, India and Korea, following on from the first such facilities in Saudi Arabia.
 Other refiners may decide to diversify into low -carbon businesses as a way of securing new sources of revenue as well as reducing end -use emissions.
Several European refiners such as Neste, Eni and Total have converted facilities into bio -refineries and some US refiners are aiming to do the same, helped by policy programmes such as California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard.
Canada plans to adopt similar policies to support the conversion of smaller, landlocked refineries.
Most of these facilities intend to produce hydrotreated vegetable oil (also referred to as "renewable diesel"), which, unlike traditional biodiesel, circumvents the blend wall that limits the amount that can be blended with diesel.
Chemical recycling, especially a pyrolysis process that converts plastic waste to feedstock (naphtha), is a lso gaining traction, not least because it could help companies to respond to growing regulatory pressure and consumer concern about plastic waste.
Some refiners are also eyeing opportunities for clean hydrogen production, which would allow them to make use of their position as major consumers of hydrogen and as operators of widespread retail networks.
These options hint at the potential for a broader strategic shift in the role of the refining sector, which becomes especially visible in the SDS.
The indust ry moves away from its traditional focus on converting crude oil into various oil products, and morphs over time into a sector that is able to convert a wider range of materials (including biomass and plastic waste) into products valued by consumers.
A shi ft of this kind will be vital to avoid a much wider wave of closure of older and less efficient operations.
270 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return 7.3 Natural gas supply Impacts of the Covid- 19 pandemic Global natural gas markets were in search of balance well before the arrival of Covid -19.
Going into 2020 a significant overhang of supply capacity was already visible, with over 200 billion cubic metres (bcm) of LNG projects having come online over the past five years, alongside the commissioning of several large -scale pipelines – notably the Power of Siberia linking Russia with China.
With buyers increasingly hesitant to commit to long -term offtake agreements, well -capitalised oil and gas companies appeared willing to take greater marketing and price risks to move new projects forward.
Even as regional spot gas prices reached historic lows, a record for LNG final investment decisions in 2019 was a sign of the industry's confidence that long -term demand growth for natural gas – and LNG in particular – was robust.
Much of this ebullience was underpinned by China's remarkable rise as a major gas consumer, and hopes that India and other emerging Asian markets would soon follow suit.
With several projects expected to take a final investment decision in 2020, a period of ample supply and low prices was widely anticipated, but the pandemic changed the course of events.
As global gas demand fell by nearly 4% in the first -half of 2020, the floor was removed from major price benchmarks, which were already reflecting loose market conditions.
The US Henry Hub, Europe's Title Transfer Facility and Asian spot price indicators all ended up converging below $2 per million British thermal units (MBtu), an unprecedented situation that left several gas exporters facing negative margins.
The impacts from Covid- 19 on gas producers have not been felt equally.
The main declines in production occurred as a result of a drop in output from gas fields associated with oil production and a reduction in gas volumes earmarked for exports in an oversupplied market.
Suppliers selling gas on flexible offtake agreements were particularly hard hit as buyers exercised their right to cancel or defer deliveries: LNG terminal utilisation dropped below 40% in the United States, with over 170 cargoes cancelled between June and September 2020.
P ipeline gas suppliers to Europe, particularly Russia and Algeria, pulled back from the market amid the LNG glut.
Contractual buffers shielding some exporters – such as long -term take -or-pay delivery commitments with prices indexed to oil – were further eroded by the oil price collapse in March 2020, which gradually worked its way through gas markets over the course of 2020.
On the demand side, Europe has to some extent acted as the balancing market, with seasonal storage at record highs from taking in surplus LNG cargoes and pipeline gas.
There has been some demand response to extremely low prices, notably from the power sector in Europe and the United States, as well as from a recovery in industrial activity in China.
But global gas markets remain amply su pplied, and the timing of any rebalancing is highly uncertain: with nearly 200 bcm of LNG projects officially deferred since the start of 2020 and several upstream projects on ice, global gas markets face an uncertain future.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 271 7 Natural gas supply outlook to 2030 Global gas production is expected to fall by nearly 200 bcm in 2020.
Although gas has so far been more resilient to the effects of the pandemic than coal or oil, a more subdued macroeconomic outlook has led to a downward revision in supply projection s in the STEPS compared with the WEO -2019 , with global production in 2030 lower by around 100 bcm and a cumulative reduction in output for 2019 -30 of nearly 1 000 bcm .
Major producers ride out the glut by reducing production, minimising operational costs and deferring capital expenditures.
With total investments in the gas supply chain down by $700 billion over the period to 2040, the lower supply is not subsequently made up in the second -half of the projection period .
Nonetheless, even with these revision s, there is still a substantial overall increase of over 50 0 bcm in gas production in the STEPS by 2030 compared with 2019 levels ( Figure 7.11 ).
Figure 7.11 ⊳ Changes in natural gas production in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2030 Shale gas production in the United States bounces back quickly in the STEPS, while Russia and the Middle East account for the majority of remaining growth The United States sees a 130 bcm increase in gas production to 2030 in the STEPS, a lower rise than in WEO -2019 , but still the largest projected growth of any country .
In the short term, the drop in US tight oil production in the aftermath of the pandemic drives associated gas production lower, while weak export margins reduce demand from US LNG terminals.
However, production rebounds relatively quickly as dry shale gas basins respond to the lost output in associated gas, particularly in the Appalachia and Haynesville plays.
This means that total gas production is on course to surpass its 2019 peak by 2022.
Over the longer term, the lower outlook for domestic demand dampens the rise in Henry Hub prices and, with some new LNG export projects crowded out by the supply glut, total US gas production flattens and starts to fall around 2030, earlier than projected in the WEO - 2019 .
- 200 - 100 0 100 200 300 400 5002019-20 2020-25 2025-30 United States Russia Middle East China Africa Rest of worldbcm IEA.
272 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Russian gas production is expected to fall nearly 100 bcm in 2020, however, economic recovery, additional pipe exports, notably to China, and an expansion of LNG capacity underpin renewed production growth over the next decade.
In the Middle East, several projects under development – alongside an expansion of Qatari LNG exports – help gas production rebound relatively quickly, although there are significant uncertainties about the prospects in less gas -rich parts of the Middle East ( Box 7.3 ).
Gas consumers in emerging Asia absorb the majority of export -led production growth, particularly China and India.
Box 7.3 ⊳ Natural gas is no easy option for parts of the Middle East The Middle East is a major gas producing re gion, but this does not mean that all parts of the region are major producers of gas.
Indeed, several countries in the Middle East have had to turn to LNG or pipeline imports to meet temporary shortfalls in supply.
With the exception of Qatar, most new Middle East gas resources in the STEPS are developed primarily to satisfy growing domestic demand.
Some national oil companies in the region, including those in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, have large financial buffers and are well equipped to develop their gas resources.
Others are more vulnerable to reductions in oil revenue, and may look to bolster their weaker fiscal positions by increasing tax yields, reducing capital expenditure and phasing out subsidies.
Such measures could have significant knock -on effects for gas developments.
This is particularly true for Iraq, where the clouded outlook for oil casts a shadow over plans to develop the infrastructure required to capture and monetise gas that is currently flared.
In many other Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) economies, the low cost output of natural gas from oil fields – known as associated gas – has been unable to keep pace with demand growth, and efforts are now underway to develop new, more technically complex and remote non -associated gas projects.
However, this push is made difficult by subsidised gas prices, which are too low to meet the estimated breakeven costs of developing these resources in the STEPS (Figure 7.12 ).
The cost of producing most of the non- associated gas slated for development in GCC countries is below the cost of importing LNG from outside the region.
As they seek the optimal balance between domestically produced, imported and exported gas, however, Middle East gas producers have to weigh a number of competing consider ations, including the level of competition for scarce investment capital; the risk that less domestic associated gas will be available if oil production is scaled back; and the relative merits of exporting gas on the one hand and of using the gas domestically to displace oil (thereby freeing up a more valuable commodity for export) on the other.
In Saudi Arabia, for example, the annual revenue in the STEPS from developing gas to displace oil in the power generation sector is more than double that of developing gas for export, taking into account the change to net subsidy and capital costs from pursuing either strategy.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 273 7 Figure 7.12 ⊳ Breakeven costs of non-associated gas resources developed for domestic consumption in selected Middle East countries in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2020-2040 Today's prices paid by gas consumers in some parts of the Middle East are well below the costs of developing new, non -associated gas resources Notes: Breakeven prices are the full delivered price of gas that is required to remunerate investment in non-associated gas projects.
Volumes shown are those developed for domestic consumption only.
Other includes Kuwait, Yemen, Oman, Jordan and Lebanon.
Production in other export -oriented regions such as North Africa and the Caspian has been revised down as a result of the weaker mediu m-term outlook for global gas trade, although prospects pick up later in the 2030s as markets tighten as a consequence of subdued spending on new projects.
Higher cost development projects elsewhere look increasingly difficult to justify in the STEPS, particularly in Europe (including new offshore developments in the UK Continental Shelf and parts of the East Mediterranean region) and in South America (Argentina, Brazil).
As a result, these countries see a structural reduction in anticipated supply growth compared to the WEO -2019 and are not able to recover the lost output later on.
Global gas markets remain amply supplied until the mid -2020s in the STEPS, which maintains downward pressure on spot prices.
However, around half of all gas traded over long dist ances remains priced in relation to oil, with gas importers tied to long -term purchase obligations that prevent them from fully taking advantage of loose market conditions.
This particularly affects buyers in Asia who have paid, on average, two -thirds more for their gas supplies in 2020 than spot prices would indicate, or around $ 20 billion extra .
In Europe, by contrast, a larger proportion of gas is imported on spot pricing terms in a more competitive market , meaning buyers and end -users have been able to realise a larger proportion of the possible savings ( Figure 7.13 ).
246810 0 500 1 000 1 500 2 000 2 500 3 000 3 500Dollars per MBtu bcmSaudi Arabia United Arab Emirates Iraq Other Iraq United Arab Emirates Saudi ArabiaEnd-user prices IEA.
274 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Figure 7.13 ⊳ Difference in natural gas import costs in China and the European Union under 100% spot or 100% oil-indexed prices An oversupplied market has widened the difference between spot and oil -linked prices Note: Oil -indexed prices are calculated based on historical correlations between delivered gas prices and a six-to-nine month average of crude oil prices .
As oil prices recover to $70/barrel by 2025 in the STEPS, an average gap of $1.30/MBtu remains between gas priced on an oil -indexed basis and spot prices, reflecting continuing loose gas market conditions.
This implies an additional average cost of more than $8 billion each year for growing import markets such as China if oil indexation is maintained as the dominant method of pricing.
Its domination could be challenged if China' s domestic market were to be liberalised so as to allow interaction between multiple buyers and sellers and create the conditions for hub -based price discovery.
However, spot pricing implies greater exposure to market volatility and does not guarantee lowe r prices, since market fundamentals could in the future push spot prices above oil -indexed reference values.
Different buyers would be likely to weigh the options differently.
With around 150 bcm of LNG contracts worldwide due to expire in the next five y ears, amid a global gas glut, buyers are likely to be looking for significant concessions on pricing and volumes in new contracts.
Sellers, however, may only be able to meet buyers halfway, and in any case are likely to struggle to offer long -term supply at anything near the spot prices seen in 2020.
With the exception of Qatar and some low cost brownfield developments in Russia, new gas export projects need to sell gas at a delivered cost of $6 -8/MBtu to break even.
As the global surplus gradually recedes after 2025 in the STEPS, prices in the main importing regions of Europe and Asia rise to these levels in order to remunerate investment in new supplies.
But this price trajectory raises questions about the long -term affordability of gas, particularly for p rice-sensitive buyers in the emerging Asian markets that account for the bulk of natural gas demand growth in the STEPS.
-30 3 6 9 12 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020Dollars per MBtu Import cost difference (right axis) 100% spot 100% oil indexedEuropean Union -10 1 2 3 4 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Billion dollarsChina IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 275 7 A sensitive global LNG balance Until recently, LNG stood out within the oil and gas industry for its ability to attract financing for c apital -intensive projects with long lead times.
In the absence of committed buyers, the market was increasingly relying on the balance sheets of oil and gas majors or on equity participation models to move LNG projects ahead.
However, lower capital spendin g and leaner upstream portfolios in the wake of the pandemic means this approach now looks more challenging.
The recent convergence of prices at low levels has also eliminated arbitrage opportunities between resource -rich and net -importing regions, challen ging the portfolio model of global LNG trade, and raised concern among banks and other financial actors about the long -term viability of new LNG projects.
Achieving a smooth balancing between LNG supply and demand over the coming years is by no means a giv en.
On the supply side, there are greater logistical and financial challenges in the way of the 140 bcm worth of liquefaction projects currently under construction.
There are also several projects around the world (around 250 bcm) that were at advanced planning stages prior to the pandemic.
Over half are located in the United States, and nearly all have been pushed back amid a stark reversal in the fortunes of the main buyers of US LNG in 2020 (even if tolling arrangements have shielded most LNG developers themselves from lower plant utilisation).
Ultimately, however, the most important questions concern the schedule and marketing arrangements for Qatari's North Field expansion: with a target of reaching 68 bcm capacity per year, it is the largest planned addition to supply over the next decade.
On the demand side, the shape of the macroeconomic recovery is the immediate uncertainty.
While some emerging and developing economies have responded to low spot prices by ramping up LNG imports (as demonstrated in I ndia in the period immediately after the emergence of Covid -19), there are contractual and infrastructural constraints in some countries that prevent them from benefitting from the global LNG surplus.
A delayed recovery from the pandemic might reduce importing country infrastructure budgets, making it more difficult for largely state- owned utilities and operators to develop regasification projects or realise plans to expand transmission and distribution grids (see Chapter 8).
Each of the scenarios explored in this Outlook reveals very different outcomes for the LNG industry.
While all scenarios show an amply supplied LNG market in the first years following the onset of Covid -19, the picture starts to diverge by 2025.
In the STEPS, a supply gap begins to emerge in the late-2 020s and an additional 50 bcm of as -yet unsanctioned LNG projects are required by 2030.
However, if recovery were to be delayed because of extended outbreaks of Covid -19 and a deeper economic slump (as in the Delayed Recovery Scenario), or if there were to be a concerted policy push for sustainable recovery (as in the SDS), the liquefaction capacity existing or under construction today would largely suffice through to the end of the decade, on the assumption that it would remain online under reduced rates o f utilisation in the first -half of this decade ( Figure 7.14 ).
276 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Figure 7.14 ⊳ Global liquefaction capacity versus total LNG demand by scenario Existing and under construction liquefaction capacity could satisfy LNG demand in different IEA scenarios until the mid -2020s, after which the need for new capacity varies by scenario Notes: LNG demand values show total global LNG trade, in contrast to results from the IEA World Energy Model, which reports LNG trade based on flows between 20 macro regions only.
Capacity available is assumed to be 90 -95% of nameplate capacity.
Under construction capacity does not include Qatar's planned 68 bcm North Field Expansion.
In the near term, a delayed recovery represents a more serious downside case for the LNG industry than the challenge of achieving the international climate goals in the SDS However, LNG demand growth in the SDS begins to slow from the mid -2020s, and by 2040 LNG requirements in the SDS are materially lower – by 15-25 % – than in the less carbonconstrained scenarios, suggesting that the goals of the Paris Agreement cast the bigge r shadow over the prospects for LNG.
Longer term dynamics A major question for the long -term prospects of natural gas is the extent to which a prolonged period of oversupply – and with it a period of lower prices – translates into enhanced policy support for gas in emerging and developing economies, which then lays the foundation for robust demand growth in the 2030s.
A related question is whether there is an acceleration of the commodity model of global gas trade over the next decade, or whether a return to bilateral contracting might be on the horizon.
Buyers can have a significant influence on developments, as demonstrated by the European Union's success in requiring its largest gas suppliers to adhere to market -based contracting and pricing norms.
Many Asian governments, themselves looking to liberalise home markets, may be encouraged to follow in the footsteps of the European Union, even if this involves lengthy legal and regulatory interventions.
200 400 600 8001 000 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040bcm Under construction Existing STEPS SDS DRSLNG capacity LNG demand IEA.
All rights reserved.Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 277 7 The availability of low cost US shale gas has been a pow erful force in challenging traditional pricing and contracting structures in the LNG market, and in the STEPS it remains an attractive option for market players seeking a flexible, diversified supply portfolio.
Almost all the growth in US gas production in the STEPS goes to export, and the same is true for increases in production in Russia, Qatar and Australia (Figure 7.15 ).
Production growth, however, is limited by the weaker balance sheets of oil and gas majors and the diminished capacity of independent LNG developers to attract private financing in a world where risk perceptions have increased significantly.
Figure 7.15 ⊳ Changes in natural gas production for today's ten-largest producers in the Stated Policies Scenario, 2019-2040 Over half of the increase in gas production in the ten- largest gas-producing countries through to 2040 is developed for export Should a tighter market appear after 2025, momentum could swing back toward lower cost incumbent exporters that have thrived under traditional models of trade.
Backed by state support for strategic pipeline or LNG expansion projects, operators in both Qatar and Russia look well placed to lead long -term supply growth in the post -Covid -19 environment, particularly given their access to vast reserves of low cost supplies.
Recent announcements of enhanced co -operation between these countries and China are a sign that traditional bilateral agreements between state -backed monopoly incumbents may yet play a significant role in future supply growth.
The other major long -term uncertainties for natural gas relate to its environmental credentials and its role in energ y transitions ( Figure 7.16 ).
Our projections show that natural gas can play a role in bringing down emissions by displacing more polluting fuels in certain countries, sectors and timeframes.
However, accelerated energy transitions and the push for net -zero emissions necessarily have profound implications for unabated ‐20 0  20  40  60  80  100  120Qatar Russia United States China Iran Saudi Arabia Australia Canada Algeria Norway Domestic demand Exportbcm IEA.
278 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return consumption of natural gas, and the SDS sees a decline in global natural gas demand post2030 to around 3 500 bcm in 2040.
Figure 7.16 ⊳ Reductions in GHG emissions attributable to changes in natural gas supply and use in the Sustainable Development Scenario, 2019-2040 Gas use and related emissions are affected by a variety of measures in the SDS; while there is some switching to gas, the net effect is a reduction in demand to 2040 Notes: Mt CO 2-eq = million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent; CCUS = carbon capture, u tilisation and storage.
Other options to re place gas include nuclear and heat.
Other measures to reduce emissions intensity include electrifying upstream operations and installing carbon capture technology.
CCUS here refers to downstream carbon capture in power generation and industry; savings from low -carbon hydrogen in 2040 produced via steam methane reforming with CCUS are included in the hydrogen category.
Efforts to reduce the GHG emissions intensity of natural gas supply are essential to make the case for gas during energy transitions, especially efforts to minimise leaks of methane to the atmosphere along the gas supply chain.
This issue is set to become even more prominent in the coming years as satellite monitoring and improved measurement tools mak e it easier to locate the extent and origin of these emissions (see Box 1.5) , and as consumer markets increasingly distinguish between different sources of gas according to their emissions characteristics.
Measures to limit the environmental footprint of natural gas prolong the opportunity in SDS for gas to play a role as a major fuel for industry, as a source of flexibility for power systems and to meet seasonal heat demand.
In some countries, notably developing economies in Asia, there is continued fuel -switching that benefits gas at the expense of coal and, to a lesser extent, oil as well.
In addition, steam reforming with carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) allows natural gas to make a claim to the market for producing low -carbon hydrogen, while downstream CCUS offers a way to make continued gas consumption compatible with a low -carbon future.
Methane OtherRenewables Efficiency Electricity CCUS Biogas/biomethaneHydrogenOther Coal Oil -3 000 -2 000 -1 000 Mt CO2-eqNatural gas replaced by lower carbon options Reduced emissions intensity of natural gas supply Switching to gas from more polluting fuels Gas use compatible with a low-emissions future IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 279 7 Most of the other policy developments in the SDS, however, constrain the opportunities for natural gas.
Accelerated deployment of renewables in the powe r sector is the largest single element of this shift, although electrification of heat demand substantially lowers gas use in buildings, and increased efficiency also avoids the need for around 300 bcm of gas use, equivalent to a 500 Mt reduction in carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions.
There is also a sharp rise in the production and use of low -carbon gases, primarily biomethane and hydrogen (see Section 7.5).
7.4 Coal supply Impacts of the Covid- 19 pandemic The coal industry entered 2020 with most indicators trend ing downwards.
The boost from a cycle of growing demand and higher prices in 2016 -18 dissipated in 2019 with a large drop in coal -fired power generation.
Prices were on the decline, although still at levels that were profitable for most producers.
Moreover, there were gathering clouds over the future in the shape of ambitious climate policies, restrictions on finance for coal -related projects, increasing concerns from investors and shareholders, and stronger public opposition not only to new projects but also to existing ones.
Competition from ever cheaper renewables and lower gas prices were also putting pressure on coal's position in electricity markets.
The pandemic has exacerbated many of these trends.
As the marginal source of generation in many markets , coal -fired generation has been heavily exposed to the short -term fall in electricity demand, especially as natural gas prices moved downward amid a glut of supply.
Many industrial users of coal meanwhile were affected by lockdowns and by the economic slump.
The fall in demand fed through to lower prices and less investment ( Box 7.4 ).
The pickup in economic activity in China put a floor under global coal demand, but elsewhere coal use has suffered.
In Europe and North America, the crisis has accelerated coal's structural decline, prompting the closure of some coal plants.
Box 7.4 ⊳ Has the pandemic changed the game for investment and financing in coal supply?
Raising money for a new coal project was already a tough proposition in many parts of the world, particularly for thermal coal, before the Covid -19 pandemic.
The number of financial institutions that have announced funding restrictions on (thermal) coal mining and coal -fired power has risen to well over 100.
Moreover, growing restrictions on access to capital are now accompanied by near -term liquidity constraints and default risks faced by coal companies, espec ially for coal -only companies with operations in financially stressed countries.
It is not surprising that coal companies have been significantly under -performing in equity markets.
The impact of the crisis on the financial performance of coal suppliers di ffers by company and market.
In the first quarter of 2020, borrowing costs rose for exportIEA.
280 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return oriented coal -only companies, particularly for companies operating in developing markets and emerging economies such as South Africa and Indonesia, where government bond yields also rose (Figure 7.17).
Borrowing costs for diversified mining companies declined alongside lower government bond yields in their home countries, although hikes in credit default swap rates for these companies indicated that investors perceived increased risks.
Coal supply investments in China and India are dominated by state -owned mining companies and have been less affected by financial market volatility.
In these countries, investment in production capacity and its financing are largely dictated by government priorities, and capital expenditure in 2020 is expected to be less affec ted by the crisis than in other parts of the world.
Financing constraints for coal -fired power also differ substantially by region.
The uptick in coal power final investment decisions in the first -half of 2020 was led by China, where state -owned utilities build most of the capacity with backing from domestic banks.
Southeast Asia has been the other major region taking investment decisions for new coal -fired power, but the prospects here are more dependent on international public finance.
Around 60% of the projects approved over the last five years (measured by capacity) in the region involve public finance from China, Japan and Korea.
These lending policies are evolving, as was apparent in July 2020 when the Japanese government tightened its policy for expor t financing of coal power.
Figure 7.17 ⊳ Share price and cost of long-term debt for selected coal companies Financing costs rose in 2020 for coal -only companies, especially those oriented towards export markets Notes: Coal = Stowe Global Coal Index .
Oil and gas = S&P Global Oil Index .
All sectors = Bloomberg World Index.
Diversified includes BHP, Rio Tinto, Gl encore and AngloAmerican.
Export- oriented includes constituents of the Stowe Global Coal Index excluding Chinese and Indian companies.
Sources: IEA calculations based on Bloomberg (2020) and Thomson Reuters Eikon (2020).
40 80 120 Jan 18 Jul 18 Jan 19 Jul 19 Jan 20 Jul 20 Coal Oil and gas All sectorsGlobal equity indices , Jan 2018=100 4%8%12% Jan 18 Jul 18 Jan 19 Jul 19 Jan 20 Jul 20 Diversified Export-oriented Australia South Africa IndonesiaCost of debts for selected coal companies and government ten -year bond yields IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 281 7 The uncertainties facing coal-exporting countries have intensified.
The drop in demand led to a further drop in coal prices, and this in turn led to a slowdown in investment.
The collapse of the Atlantic market has worsened the outlook for Colombian and US exporters.
In China and India, the world's two largest coal importers, governments have reinforced their commitment to meet demand as far as possible from domestic coal and to reduce their reliance on internationally traded supply.
Japan plans to phase out its most inefficient coal-fired power plants.
Policy preferences in Korea are shifting away from coal as well.
While momentum behind the phase -out of coal has gathered pace in some countries and global demand may have peaked, however, it is too soon to proclaim its demise.
Lowe r cost renewables and the prospect of an extended period of low natural gas prices are chipping away at the perception that coal is cheap, but there remain some areas where substitutes for coal are difficult, such as steel production (Spotlight).
Moreover, given existing resources and infrastructure, the pandemic has yet to lead to a fundamental change in the position of coal in some key emerging market and developing economies.
In some instances, the economic slump may have even shored up support for a fue l that remains a significant source of domestic energy supply and employment.
Coal projects continue to move ahead in some energy -hungry countries such as Indonesia, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Philippines and Viet Nam.
Coal retains a strong presence in two giants of the global energy economy, China and India.
In China, the environmental factors that have tempered coal use sit alongside increasing worries about dependence on imported fuels.
By far, coal remains the largest domestic fossil fuel resource in China, as well as the largest single component of its energy mix, and import dependency concerns tend to reinforce its position.
In India, as in China, renewables are growing fast, but coal still plays a part in India's strategic planning concerning poverty reduction, infrastructure development and increased industrialisation.
This was underlined in 2020 in India by moves to launch auctions for commercial coal mining and to invest in removing bottlenecks in coal infrastructure.
How much coal is in the clean energy value chain?
Coal is instrumental in various ways in the global production of cement, iron, steel, aluminium, silicon and ferroalloys; these in turn are key elements of many global manufacturing processes, including those for wind turbi nes and solar photovoltaic (PV) panels.
The use of coal in the clean energy value chain is not often given consideration, and what discussion there is of it tends to be quite polemical.
There is merit in a dispassionate analysis.
Such analysis requires some boundaries.
The processing and refining of many metals involves electricity -intensive processes, which implies a significant amount of coal consumption embedded in the product, especially in China, a key manufacturing centre.
282 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return In the case of aluminium, for example, electricity by some distance is the largest input to the production process.
However, we do not include electricity in this assessment, as coal is not required to produce electricity.
Instead the analysis focuses on other processes, e.g.
produc ing clinker for cement, manufacturing, anodes for aluminium production and reducing iron ore in blast furnaces .
In these processes, alternatives to coal are much more difficult (even if coal is not the only option and technological progress will offer other lower carbon routes in the future).
Even with these boundaries, calculating the amount of coal required to produce various renewable technologies is not straightforward.
In the case of steel, for example, one needs to take a view on whether it is new ste el produced in a basic oxygen furnace, which typically requires coal and accounts for around 70% of today's steel production, or steel produced in an electric arc furnace that uses scrap steel.
The material intensity of the various renewable manufacturing processes is another important variable.
Overall, looking at the period from today to 2030, we estimate that the production of steel, cement, cast iron, aluminium, silicon and ferroalloys for wind turbines and solar PV panels will require an average annual consumption of 14 -16 million tonnes of coal equivalent (Mtce) of coal in the STEPS and 26 -30 Mtce of coal in the SDS.
Two -thirds of this is for the production of steel.
This estimate incorporates a learning curve for the improvement of current technologie s and uses the current average coal/coke consumption for materials production.
The exact numbers depend on the specific assumptions used, but would not change the following conclusions:  A non -negligible amount of coal is needed to produce the materials used in wind and solar PV installations in an efficient way.
 Coal used for renewable energy component manufacturing represents less than 1% of current coal demand.
Therefore analysis of the outlook for coal is not substantially altered by demand from this manufacturing area.
 The benefits of solar PV and wind in terms of CO 2 savings surpass the CO 2 emitted by coal use in their manufacturing processes.
 Steel making accounts for most of the coal consumption and it should be the priority when targeting coal -related industrial CO 2 emissions in the clean energy value chain.
Coal supply outlook to 2030 The outlook for coal production over the next decade is lower in the STEPS than in WEO2019, with global coal production falling towards 5 000 Mtce by 2030 ( Figure 7.18 ).
India is the only country that sees producti on growth (albeit at a slower pace than in WEO -2019 ), reflecting the trajectory of coal demand as well as the policy priority in India to boost supply.
In a stagnant and uncertain traded coal market, Australia and Russia are more resilient than other exporters, while Colombia n and US exporters face shrinki ng opportunities in the Atlantic Basin .
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 283 7 Figure 7.18 ⊳ Coal production by key country While coal production falls through to 2030 in the STEPS, it would need to decline much further to be on a pathway consistent with international climate goals Note s: Mtce = million tonnes of coal equivalent .
The pre -cr isis value is represented by the WEO -2 019 Stated Policies Scenario projection.
Conditions for coal supply in the SDS are considerably more challenging: the collapse in coal demand by more than 40 % over the period to 2030 means that production falls rapidly in all producing regions.
In this scenario, the average annual supply investment to 2030 stands at $23 billion, less than half the level of the STEPS, as the investment case in China and India declines dramatically over the projection period in line with much weak er demand prospects .
The average cost of producing coal edges higher over time in the STEPS.
The cost structure varies by producer, but mining and processing costs among coal exporters typically account for around half the total cash costs of producing coal and bringing it to an export hub.
Inland transport can also account for a substantial element of the cost structure, notably in Russia due to long distances between mines and ports.
Overall, mechanisation (for underground mining) and the use of large -scale equipment (for open pit mining) have been the main areas fo r innovation, but digital and automated systems, including driverless trucks, robotic mining, and mine modelling and simulations, are also being deployed to improve productivity.
The lower oil price outlook, compared with the WEO -2019 , also takes 4% off pr ojected average coal supply costs for 2030 on free on board basis (i.e.
excluding seaborne transport costs).
Outlook for coal trade The Covid -19 pandemic has added further uncertainty to the outlook for international coal trade.
China and India, which account for two -thirds of global coal consumption, are central to the prospects for coal exports.
Coal imports represent around 10% of their consumption, but the size of their markets means that this accounts for around 40% of all global coal 1 0002 0003 0004 0005 0006 000 2019 2030 STEPS2030 Pre-crisis2030 SDSMtceRest of world South Africa Russia Indonesia United States Australia India China IEA.
284 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return trade.
As a result, relatively small movements in the coal balances of either China or India can have outsize implications for coal trade.
Such movements could be triggered by changes in the performance of the economy, the power sector, the coal sector or in government p olicies, all of which are less certain in the pandemic era.
Significant swings in the global traded coal market therefore should not come as a surprise.
China became a net importer of coal in 2009, emerging as the world's largest importer in 2011.
This shi ft triggered a wave of investment around the world.
Many felt that China's demand for imports could only rise.
By 2014, however, China's imports were falling yearon-year and, although they have remained sizeable since then, their level and trajectory rema in extremely difficult to predict.
The government has made frequent market interventions, and quality tests, import quotas and other policy changes have shaken international markets in recent years.
In India, the government has renewed its intention to reduce imports as much as possible: Coal India has maintained its output target of 1 billion tonnes in physical volumes (approximately 550 Mtce ) by 2023 -24.
India is also moving to encourage commercial mining.
Even if these ambitions are achieved only in part, this would narrow the scope to increase imports for coking coal for steel producers, and some steam coal for coastal power generation plants that have been designed to receive imported grades.
An additional uncertainty comes from northeast Asia.
This h as traditionally been a reliable region for exporters as coal plants there usually run at full load, but this baseload supply position is being challenged by air pollution regulations in Korea, by expanding renewables, and the restarting of some nuclear facilities in Japan.
Both Korea and Japan have policy aims to reduce reliance on coal , which pose a significant downside risk for imports in the coming years.
This is one manifestation of the broader risk for coal trade that stems from the increasing pressure from a variety of stakeholders to curb fossil fuels in general and coal-fired power generation in particular.
Against th is background, the volume of coal trade has been revised down in the STEPS by 10% compared with the WEO -2019 .
Global coal trade in thermal and coking coal is now projected to decline by around 15% in the STEPS over the 2019 -30 period.
Imports to India barely return to pre -Covid levels over the coming decade as most of the projected growth in coal demand is met by a rise in domestic production.
There is a substantial decline in imports to China, Japan and Korea as well as to Europe.
Among exporters, Russia and Australia see export volumes rise close to pre -crisis levels by 2030, while Indonesia redirects more output to domestic use.
US exports, which mainly serve the shrinking European market, decline.
Coal trade contracts much more rapidly in the SDS, falling to 620 Mtce by 2030.
All exporters are heavily affected, but those serving the emerging Asian markets with higher exposure to coking coal see a lesser decline: Australia remains the largest exporter and Russia emerges as the second -largest as thermal coal trade drops by half to 2030, while coking coal falls by one -third.
Imports of coking coal to India and some other developing Asian countries slightly increase as a result of their increasing production of crude steel, for which alternatives to coal are not readily available.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 285 7 7.5 Other fuels 7.5.1 Modern use of solid biomass4 Today use of solid biomass and renewable waste accounts for almost 40% of renewable energy demand (530 million tonnes of oil equivalent [Mtoe]).
These fuels have remained relatively robust during the Covid- 19 crisis, benefitting from feedstock diversity, versatility in a variety of demand applications and continued policy support.
Industrial applications and commercial heat and power production account for three -quarters of solid biomass and renewable waste, with the remainder used for space and water heating in buildings.
Examples of solid biomass and renewable waste include process residues in pulp and paper mills, municipal waste as part of the fuel mix of large cement kilns, agricultural waste for cogeneration plants and wood pellets for domestic boilers.
Recent growth has come mostly from the power and commercial heat sectors.
Over the past three years, generation from solid biomass and renewable waste increased by more than 4% annually and continued to rise during the crisis in 2020.
Expansion in emerging Asian countries has been supported by a 23 gigawatt (GW) targe t in China's 13 th Five-Year Plan, growing combustion of waste in China, improvements in feedstock availability in India and Southeast Asia, and policy efforts to diversify away from coal.
Utilities and system planners increasingly recognise the value that biomass and waste can provide as a flexible renewable source that can be stored and used for dispatchable generation, facilitating the uptake of variable solar and wind, and the integration of power and heating systems.
By contrast, use of biomass and wast e in industry has fallen during the pandemic amid weakened output, especially in resource -rich markets where biomass and waste play important roles in industrial processes, i.e.
Brazil, India and United States.
In the STEPS, solid biomass and renewable waste expand by one -third to reach 700 Mtoe in 2030.
China accounts for almost a third of this growth.
Use in the power and heat generation sectors surpasses use in industry in the mid -2020s, fostered by the roll o ut of energy -from -waste projects in China, national renewable energy targets in the European Union and continued development of cogeneration in the agro -food sector in India.
By 2040, solid biomass and renewable waste account for more than a quarter of ren ewable demand in the STEPS, even as other sources expand strongly, and remain by far the largest source of low -carbon fuel ( Figure 7.19 ).
Under the more ambitious decarbonisation pathway of the SDS, modern use of solid biomass and renewable waste surpasses 1 000 Mtoe, with a strong orientation towards power generation and heat.
Increased use of biomass for power in the SDS serves as an important source of system flexibility and helps to reduce GHG emissions.
Nevertheless , the growth of solid biomass and renewable waste use in the SDS is less than that of other low-carbon fuels, and there is more competition for feedstock from other applications 4 This section excludes the traditional use of biomass for residential cooking and heating, which is covered in Chapter 3.
286 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return (e.g.
materials, bio -chemicals, bio -based synfuels).
Efforts to promote biodiv ersity also constrain the availability of sustainable and economically viable biomass resources in a number of regions.
Figure 7.19 ⊳ Global supply of low-carbon fuels by scenario The prospects for low -carbon fuels are closely linked to policies targeting a reduction in emissions in hard- to-abate sectors; these policies are significantly strengthened in the SDS *Includes solid biomass and renewable waste, but excludes traditional uses for cooking and heating.
Note s: Values display direct -use in end- uses, blending in gas grid, power and heat generation sectors.
Biogases includes biogas and biomethane.
7.5.2 Liquid biofuels The liquid biofuels indust ry – mainly producing ethanol and biodiesel – has had a turbulent 2020, with a combination of low demand for transport fuels and low oil prices returning the supply of biofuels to levels last seen in 2017.
The overall fall in demand for transport fuels limited biofuels consumption under mandate policies that required blending of a certain percentage of biofuels.
Lower oil prices also dragged down biofuel prices: in the United States, the ethanol price reached an all -time low of $0.16 per litre (L) in March, compared to an average price of $0.33/L in 2019.
At the low point for oil markets in April 2020, almost half of US ethanol production capacity was suspended.
The market uncertainty was also a contributing factor to the estimated 12% fall in biofuels suppl y investment in 2020 compared with 2019.
Countries are reacting to the crisis with a variety of measures.
They include revisiting blending mandates for ethanol and biodiesel, cutting taxes, providing loans and relaxing regulatory constraints.
Different policy directions have been taken in various countries.
Brazil authorised the use of hydrous ethanol to boost ethanol competitiveness, for example, while Malaysia halted the roll out of its 20% biodiesel blending mandate.
100 200 300 400 2019 2040 2040 2019 2040 2040 2019 2040 2040Mtoe Stated Policies Scenario Sustainable Development ScenarioLiquid biofuels Biogases Low-carbon hydrogen 300 600 9001 200 2019 2040 2040 Solid biomass* IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 287 7 Policies are a crucial variable for the outlook for all biofuels, particularly in a lower oil and gas price environment.
On the surface, many aspects of the policy landscape look encouraging.
The Renewable Fuel Standard in the United States, the E10 programme in China, targets for renewables in transport in the European Union and the United Kingdom, the rollout of the Renovabio programme in Brazil, the Clean Fuel Standard in Canada, and ambitious blending mandates in Southeast Asia appear to offer the promise of a rapid recovery in demand.
There has also been some encouraging progress in the development of "drop -in" 5 biofuels: while these fuels are relatively expensive at the moment, they have the potential to alter the competitive dynamics of the biofuels industry, if successfully commercialis ed (see Section 7.2.2).
In the STEPS, global biofuels demand returns to its 2019 level in 2021 and expands robustly to 2030: demand increases by 1.5 mboe/d (million barrels of oil equivalent per day) in the 2019- 30 period and by an additional 1.5 mboe/d fr om 2030 to 2040.
In the SDS, the assumption of even stronger policy action pushes biofuel use up by 4.2 mboe/d by 2030, with a further increase by 1.2 mboe/d over ten years to 2040; more than half of the 201940 growth comes from advanced biofuels.
The sort of growth envisaged in the STEPS and the SDS, however, cannot be taken for granted.
A longer pandemic and a deeper economic slump (as in the Delayed Recovery Scenario, see Chapter 8) would depress fuel demand, making it easier to meet targets base d on shares of demand.
It is also possible that current policy ambitions could be revisited.
The United States and China together account for 40% of the 2019 -30 growth in global biofuel use in the STEPS.
In the United States, lower fuel demand has reignite d a vigorous debate between biofuel and oil interests about the implementation of the Renewable Fuel Standard 6, which could dent ethanol demand if it leads to the granting of widespread exemptions from the standard.
In China, expected growth would plummet if provinces were to drop out of the E10 programme.7 There are other risks too.
The cost gap between biofuels and petroleum fuels could lead to some scaling back of policy measures related to blending levels in non -producing countries.
And failure to make the investments required by currently stated policies could lead to targets being missed: in 2019, global investment in new biofuel production capacity was just above $2 billion while STEPS requires more than $10 billion per year on average in the 2020 -30 period (IEA, 2020 b).
7.5.3 Biogas and biomethane Both biogas and biomethane originate from a range of organic feedstocks whose energy potential is underutilised today.
Both can provide a sustainable, low -carbon source of energy; there are multiple pathways for their production and also a wide range of potential uses, depending on policy priorities and local circumstances.
5 A drop -in biofuel can be blended in conventional fuel at any rate without engine modific ations.
6 The Renewable Fuel Standard sets targets of biofuel consumption and ensures the reporting, registration and compliance of blended fuel sold by fuel suppliers.
7 The E10 programme aims at deploying the use of gasoline with 10% of ethanol (in volume) nationwide.
288 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Biogas is a mixture of methane, CO 2 and small quantities of other gase s. It is used to generate power , provide local industrial heat and meet cooking demand.
Biogas offers a sustainable way to meet community energy needs, especially where access to electrical grids is challenging or where there is a requirement for heat that cannot be met by renewable electricity.
In developing countries, biogas reduces reliance on solid biomass as a cooking fuel, improving health and economic outcomes .
The quantity of biogas developed in the STEPS remains broadly unchanged from the WEO -2019 , as similar quantities are required to meet clean cooking access targets, while the use of biogas in the power sector sees a modest increase of around 3% in 2040.
In total, the direct use of biogas more than doubles to 70 Mtoe from around 30 Mtoe today.
Figure 7.20 ⊳ Biomethane production by region in the Stated Policies Scenario and sensitivity on cost-competitive volumes available in 2040 Biomethane production increases ten -fold to 2040, albeit from a low base.
A 30% increase in natural gas prices could double the cost -competitive volumes developed in 2040 .
The supply of b iomethane – biogas upgraded to a near- pure source of methane – increase s rapidly in our scenarios from a low base, but has nonetheless been revised down by around 10% compared with the WEO -2019 .
Emerging market and developing countries, particularly in Asia, are responsible for the majority of growth in biomethane in the STEP S. Projected investment, however, is limited by the more capital -constrained environment now facing utilities in this region, and by low cost natural gas supply.
More widespread adoption of supportive policies is needed to unlock large -scale injection of b iomethane into natural gas grids.
Such policies might take the form of harmonised rules on guarantees of origin, or recognition of a voided methane emissions that would otherwise take place from the decomposition of feedstocks .
In addition to policy uncertainty, commercial dynamics could also affect the prospects for biomethane ( Figure 7.20 ).
An in-depth assessment of production costs and sustainable 20 40 60 80 100 2015 2019 2025 2030 2035 2040bcm North America Europe Asia Pacific Rest of worldSTEPS - 100 - 50 0 50 100Natural gas pricesCO₂ pricesBiodigester costs bcm -10% -20% -30% +10% +20% +30%Sensitivity in STEPS, 2040 IEA.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 289 7 potential of biomethane globally finds that a 30% increase in natural gas prices in the STEPS would almost double the volumes of biomethane that could be produced cost competitively by 2040.
Likewise, a similarly scaled reduction in the costs of biodigeste rs (which form the largest part of overall capital expenditure for most projects) could make an additional 25 bcm of biomethane commercially attractive.
Commercial dynamics work both ways, however, and a corresponding decrease in gas prices or increase in the cost of biodigesters could significantly reduce the prospects for private sector investment.
7.5.4 Nuclear fuels Nuclear power provides around 10% of global electricity supply and is the second -largest low-emissions source after hydropower.
Following a record high for nuclear power production in 2019, the fall in electricity demand resulting from the Covid -19 crisis sees nuclear output fall by 1 25 terawatt -hours ( TWh ) in 2020, before returning to pre -crisis levels in 2023.
Global nuclear power output ris es by around 15% in the 2020- 30 period , complementing the increase in renewables generation , as its share of supply declines slightly with two divergent regional trends .
In emerging market and developing economies, nuclear power output increases by more th an 60% from 2019 to 2030.
With 48 nuclear power reactors in operation and 11 under construction, China overtakes the United States and the Europe an Union with the largest nuclear power generation capacity.
New nuclear power developments are also underway i n Russia, India and the Middle East.
In contrast, in advanced economies where nuclear power is the largest source of low -emissions electricity today, output is set to fall by 10% from 2019 to 2030.
Capacity declines by 20% in the European Union and by 10% in the United States in the period to 2030.
In terms of fuel supply for nuclear power generation, primary production represent s about 90% of global demand with secondary supply meeting the balance.
In recent years, excessive oversupply of primary uranium production resulted in very low uranium prices, which have been decreasing for more than a decade.
These unfavourable market conditions caused a sharp fall in investment to develop new mining projects as well as cuts in production levels at existing mines notably in Canada, Kazakhstan and Niger.
Nonetheless, established resources of uranium are more than adequate to satisfy global reactor requirements to well beyond 2040.
Uranium resources are widely distributed around the world with Australia hosting the l argest total resources (26% of the total), with Kazakhstan and Canada having an almost equal resource base, rough ly 11% of the total each (World Nuclear Association, 2020).
7.5.5 Low -carbon hydrogen Although current consumption is relatively low, hydrogen rece ives a great deal of attention and its production for a variety of clean energy applications is widely expected to expand rapidly.
Hydrogen is a versatile energy carrier that can be produced from fossil fuels or electricity via electrolysis of water.
To be low-carbon hydrogen, either the emissions associated with fossil -based hydrogen production must be prevented (for example by IEA.
All rights reserved.290 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return capturing and storing CO 2) or the electricity input to hydrogen produced from water must be from renewable or nuclear sources.
A m ore resilient energy sector could make use of low -carbon hydrogen in a variety of applications, e.g.
iron and steel and fertiliser production, transport (directly in road vehicles and trains, or as synthetic fuels in airplanes and ships) and buildings (for heating).
It could also be used to store electricity over weeks or months and to generate clean, on -demand power generation to help balance power systems.
This flexibility, combined with its anticipated importance in tackling emissions in the hard -to-abat e sectors, underpins the current efforts in many countries to develop effective policy support for low -carbon hydrogen.
As with other low- carbon fuels, the outlook for hydrogen depends on supportive policies.
If hydrogen use is to become widespread, targeted support is needed for low -carbon production, for the development of infrastructure to store and transport it, and for measures to stimulate demand in sectors where the near -term opportunities are the most significant.
While low -carbon hydrogen is expens ive today, costs are expected to decline as production expands and as the necessary infrastructure is rolled out.
In the absence of dedicated policies, the current economic slump could exacerbate some of the risks associated with investment in hydrogen pro jects and a slow uptake.
It could also reduce the capacity of some companies to co -invest in association with governments as well as the willingness of consumers to purchase low -carbon fuels.
It is against this background that hydrogen has emerged as a focus for economic stimulus spending in several countries.
In response to the Covid- 19 pandemic, a number of governments have enhanced or acc elerated their efforts to scale up hydrogen infrastructure, demand and expertise.8 Some of the plans are ambitious.
F or example, scaling up the manufacturing and installation of electrolysers to reach the European Commission's 40 GW target by 2030 would require the addition of almost 1 GW of factory capacity each year from 2023, in addition to the 1.7 GW already in operation or under construction in Europe.
Financing for this is likely to rely heavily on public funding and incentives, given the uncertainty about when hydrogen demand will be sufficient to support private investment.
8 Australia announced over $200 million for a new Advancing Hydrogen Fund in May 2020.
Korea included hydrogen infrastructure in its Green New Deal announcement in July 2020.
Japan recommitted to hydrogen infrastructure for its postponed Olympic Games.
Canada is planning to launch a national hydrogen strategy in the third -quarter 2020.
In Europe, the Netherlands published its Government Strategy on Hydrogen in April 2020; Germany announced a $10 billion Hydrogen Strategy in June 2020; Portug al published a national strategy for public consultation in May 2020.
France's September 2020 economic recovery plan included over $2 billion for hydrogen and its June 2020 rescue plan for the aviation sector aims to support hydrogenbased fuels.
I n July 2 020, the European Commission proposed a new hydrogen strategy aiming for at least 6 GW of electrolysers installed in the E uropean Union by 2024 running on renewable electricity, rising to 40 GW by 2030.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 291 7 Figure 7.21 ⊳ Cost gap to be bridged between the costs of delivered lowcarbon and merchant hydrogen in Europe, 2020 and 2030 Lower gas prices in 2020 increase the cost gap for low -carbon hydrogen that government policy must bridge in the near term, but investment narrows it by 2030 in the STEPS Notes: Capex = capital expenditure; opex = operating expenditure.
Costs are inclusive of tax with the exception of electricity and natural gas inputs to hydrogen production.
Merchant hydrogen assumes production from an existing steam methane reformer, inflated to 2030 in line with STEPS industrial natural gas prices and prevailing CO 2 prices.
Hydrogen costs are for new electrolysers or new gas reformers equipped with CCUS, which are assumed to enter operation in Europe before 2030.
Hydrogen production costs from offshore wind assume operation of the electrolyser at full capacity during all hours of offshore wind output and no additional network infrastructure.
Production is assumed to be close to the site of industrial consumption.
Capex and opex are shown in proportion to their r elative shares of total hydrogen supply costs.
For key hydrogen -using sectors that could provide near -term end -uses – refineries, ammonia, methanol and steel production – the cost gap between electrolysis hydrogen and merchant hydrogen from natural gas reforming has grown wider recently as a result of low natural gas prices.
As a result, policies in Europe may need to ensure that a gap of $50/MBtu or more can be bridged by consumers or taxpayers in order to incentivise new electrolysis hydrogen ( Figure 7.21 ).
The cost gap, however, could narrow considerably by 2030, and in certain locations cheaper renewable electricity could support such lower prices even sooner.
End -user gas prices in both the STEPS and the SDS rise above their pre2020 levels in Europe by 2030, while the costs of offshore wind power fall.
Electrolyser costs are also likely to fall as manufacturing and installation scales up and efficiencies increase.
By 2030, several of the large- scale projects for equipping hydrogen production with CCUS could also be in operation ( Box 7.5 ).
For existing industrial hydrogen producers and consumers, retrofitting with CCUS could be a particularly attractive option for switching to low -carbon hydrogen where adequate CO 2 storage capacity is available and affordable.
20 40 60 80 Merchant Grid electricityOffshore windMerchant Grid electricityOffshore windGas with CCUSDollars per MBtu Delivered price Capex Opex (including electricity costs)2020 STEPS, 2030 IEA.
292 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return Box 7.5 ⊳ Could net-zero emissions commitments and clean hydrogen demand shape a brighter future for CCUS?
CCUS has had mixed fortunes in recent years.
While investment in CCUS in 2010 -19 was ten-times higher than in the preceding decade, capital spending on CCUS projects was modest in 2019 at under $1 billion.
There have been some important milestones.
The first two CCUS trains of the Gorgon LNG project started operation in 2019, after lengthy delays, making it the world's largest dedicated geological CO 2 storage facility (i.e.
the CO 2 is not used for enhanced oil recovery).
The Alberta Carbon Trunk Line project in Canada also began operations in 2020.
There are reasons to think that the outlook for the next ten years may improve.
While very few additional projects have reached final investment decisions, the rising numb er of public and private sector commitments to reach net -zero emissions, combined with growing interest in clean hydrogen production and direct air capture, has given CCUS renewed momentum.
We estimate that large -scale CCUS projects at an advanced stage of planning around the world would represent a combined capital investment of around $27 billion if they all come to fruition.
As with other clean energy investments, these plans are subject to increased uncertainty and potential delays as a result of the Co vid-19-related economic downturn.
Almost all will rely on some form of policy support or incentive s to move ahead , including access to the expanded 45Q tax credits in the United States and to programmes such as the European Innovation Fund and funding init iatives in Japan.9 Investment in CCUS as a part of sustainable recovery plans could be critical in maintaining momentum and applying the technology widely in the next decade.
Support f or CCUS following the 2008 global financial crisis was behind the succes sful commissioning of several projects in operation today, although in general CCUS projects had a lower success rate compared with funding for other large -scale innovative clean energy technologies (IEA, 2020c).
Before 2010, capture of CO 2 from relatively high purity sources in the fuel supply sector dominated investment in CCUS, primarily for natural gas processing plants ( Figure 7.22 ).
While the combined CO 2 capture capacity of these projects was large, more than 20 Mt per year, their low unit costs and linkage with enhanced oil recovery (EOR) kept the total investment low.
The presence of oil and gas companies in CCUS projects remained significant in 2010 -19, with just 8 of the 21 operational projects today capturing CO 2 from outside the oil and gas sector and all projects having a connection to that sector, including through linkages to EOR.
The market demand for CO 2 for EOR in North America has led to most of the investment activity being concentrated there, although 9 Section 45Q of the US tax code provides up to $50 ( inflation adjusted) per tonne of CO 2 sent to geological storage, or up to $35 per tonne used for enhanced oil recovery for up to 12 years, if the effectiveness of storage is monitored and construction begins by 1 January 2024.
Chapter 7 | Outlook for fuel supply 293 7 one facility that captures CO 2 from a power plant to supply EOR operators in Texas suspended operations in mid- 2020 as oil prices fell.
The composition of projects currently being developed worldwide indicates that the power sector in the United States could continue to be the main destination of CCUS investment.
Following the effective application of the full CCUS value chain to hydrogen production from natural gas in Abu Dhabi, Canada and the United States in recent years, however, hydrogen is set to be another major driver of CCUS investment, especially if governments implement policies to drive investment in line with the SDS.
In that scenario, CCUS investment reaches $55 billion in 2030, with hydrogen production from natural gas reforming representing around 15% of the total.
Figure 7.22 ⊳ Historical and planned investments in large-scale CCUS projects, 1980-2030 Investment in CCUS in 2010 -19 was ten -times that of the preceding decade and if today's advanced projects come to fruition then the level could double again by 2030 Notes: Industry includes cement, chemicals and iron and steel.
Other fuel supply includes gas processing and biofuels.
Investment represents annual capital spending on projects for the capture, transport or storage of CO 2 at a scale of 0.6 Mt per year or more, following a final investment decision.
Costs are the additional costs of adding CCUS to an existing emitter, or the full plant costs for new -build power generation and hydrogen facilities.
Given the size of CCUS projects and the potential for higher load factors, a single unit could add low -carbon hydrogen production capacity equivalent to around 2 -3 GW of electrolysers.
However, the high capital needs and lead times of each project could also prove a disadvantage compared to more modular electrolyser additions of 10 megawatts (MW) to 100 MW each.
As with electrolysis, policy mechanisms that ensure revenues cover operational costs will be critical for CCUS, together with policies that deliver commercial and guaranteed CO 2 storage s ervices.
California's Low -Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) offers one potential model: 5 10 15 20 25 30 1980-89 1990-99 2000-09 2010-19 Projects at an advanced stage of planning for 2020-30Billion dollars (2019)Other fuel supply Hydrogen Industry Power Rest of world Europe China North AmericaBy technology By region IEA.
294 World Energy O utlook 2020 | An uncertain return it supports the revenue of low -carbon hydrogen suppliers, as well as that of suppliers of biomethane, biofuels and electricity for transport, by issuing credits which they ca n sell.
Despite disruptions to fuel demand in 2020, the price of LCFS credits has not dipped below the 2019 average of $190 per tonne of CO 2 avoided .
To drive investment and innovation in low-carbon fuels, Canada is developing a similar system which will c ome into effect for liquid fuels in 2022.
Figure 7.23 ⊳ Global demand for hydrogen from electrolysis and fossil fuels with CCUS by scenario Hydrogen production that can support net -zero emissions energy systems increases dramatically in the SDS, mostly for transport end -uses Note: Other includes demand for non -blended low -carbon hydrogen in agriculture and buildings.
In the SDS, governments around the world make concerted efforts to invest in all aspects of the hydrogen value chain, including research and development.
This would result in a rapid expansion of hydrogen production from electrolysis and fos sil fuels with CCUS, reaching 18 Mt ( more than 50 Mtoe) in 2030 and 75 Mt (215 Mtoe) by 2040 ( Figure 7.23 ).
By 2040, hydrogen would be complementing sustainable biofuels in long -distance transport via its conversion to synthetic aviation and shipping fuels such as ammonia or hydrocarbons manufactured with captured CO 2.
The amount of energy carried and stored in hydrogen in the SDS in 2040 would be more than the global output of wind and solar energy today, and would require around 40% more energy to produce it.
20 40 60 80 2030 2040 2030 2040 Blended into gas grid Chemicals and steel Mobility OtherSDS STEPSMt IEA.
All rights reserved.Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 295 Chapter 8 A delayed recovery The pandemic continues, the recession deepens •The spread of the Covid -19 pandemic is brought under control during the course of 2021 in the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) and the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) , and the subsequent economic recovery means that the global economy is only 5% smaller by 2025 than it would have been under a precrisis trajectory.
There is however a risk that these assumptions are too optimistic.
In the Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS), we explore what might happen if this turns out to be the case.
•In the DRS, more prolonged outbreaks of Covid- 19 prompt continued periodic confinements and other restrictive measures by governments.
In addition to a deeper near -term recession, the long -term growth potential of the global economy is significantly impaired as high unemployment erodes human capital and as bankruptcies and structural economic changes render some physical capital unproductive.
There are lasting changes in consumer behaviour and company strategies.
By 2030, the global economy is nearly 10% smaller than in the STEPS.
Figure 8.1 ⊳ Selected indicators in the Delayed Recovery Scenario Weaker economic outlook in the DRS sets back efforts to push energy transitions and alleviate energy poverty; emissions reductions come for the wrong reasons •This scenario puts many aspects of global energy into slow motion, holding back energy demand and CO 2 emissions compared with the STEPS but also slowing many of the structural changes in the energy sector that are essential for clean energy transitions.
There is systematic u nderinvestment in new, cleaner energy 75 100 125 150 2019 2030Index (2019 = 100) Pre-crisis STEPS DRS Reaching 2019 levelsGDP 2019 2030Energy demand 2019 2030Emissions 40%60%80%100% 2019 2030Energy access Electricity Clean cookingSUMMARY IEA.
296 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic technologies and over relian ce on existing capital stock.
Inequalities in the global economy and in the energy sector worsen, and recent progress towards universal access to energy is slowed or goes into reverse as the incomes of the poorest are hit and funding for access programmes is squeezed.
• Oil demand growth slows to a crawl in the DRS and does not exceed 2019 levels until the latter part of the 2020s, after which global consumption plateaus at just under 100 mb/d.
Road freight, shipping and aviation are all heavily affected by the economic slowdown and by changes in behaviour, although oil use in cars is buttressed somewhat by a slower turnover in the car fleet and, in the near term, by a Covid -19-induced preference for travelling by car rather than by public transport.
• Lower oil demand and prices in the DRS increase the economic and social pressures on major oil and gas producing countries, while also limiting their scope for meaningful economic diversification and integration into global value chains.
Unsuccessful efforts to reduce reliance on hydrocarbon revenue would compound the risks facing these producer economies and the global markets that they supply.
• Electricity demand in the DRS is down by 6% compared with the STEPS, and renewables take a slightly higher share of generation.
The pace of growth in wind and solar capacity is relatively robust in the power sector, but – as in the STEPS – renewables face a much tougher outlook in hard- to-abate sectors such as longdistance transport and industry.
• There are warning signs for energy transitions and for electricity security in the disparity between growing investment needs for grids, in part to accommodate higher shares of wind and solar PV, and falling revenues for grid operators.
• Coal consumption takes another hit in the DRS: after a 10% drop in 2020, coal -fired generation sees a further 8% fall to 2030; fewer new coal plants are built, more are retired and operating plants run fewer hours.
• Natural gas demand i s strongly affected by the weaker outlook for power and industry; this prolongs the current surplus in supply until the early 2030s and keeps regional prices subdued, placing significant strains on the balance sheets of exportoriented producers and new LN G projects.
• Investments in fossil fuels over the period to 2030 are lower in the DRS by around 10%, but this is not compensated for by a reallocation of capital towards low -carbon technologies, which also experience a slowdown in investment activity.
• CO 2 emissions are reduced compared with the STEPS and flatten below 2019 levels.
However, this is far from sufficient to achieve climate objectives and comes at a huge social and economic cost.
Based on the lower GDP levels in the DRS, this reduction in emissio ns costs nearly $6 000 for every tonne of CO 2 that is saved.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 297 8 8.1 Introd uction Hopes for a rapid halt to the global spread of the coronavirus and its economic fallout have dissipated over the course of 2020, but there remains a widespread assumption that things will return to something approaching "normal".
That raises questions abou t whether the "new normal" will be different from the old one, and whether changes in policies and company strategies could shift global energy development onto a new path.
The differences between the outcomes in the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) and th e Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) highlight the importance of these choices.
However, the underlying assumptions in the STEPS and SDS may be too optimistic.
The pandemic may stay with us for longer, leaving deeper scars on social and economic life.
The economic recovery may also be less robust than assumed.
These two assumptions are clearly linked, although not inextricably so: the economic recovery could be weaker than assumed even if the global spread of Covid- 19 is brought to a rapid halt.
This is what we explore in a Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS) .
In this scenario, lockdowns in various forms are much more prolonged; periodic confinements, social distancing and other restrictive measures become part of everyday life; and the appearance of an eff ective vaccine or therapeutics is delayed.
The public health crisis strains the ability of many governments to provide financial lifelines to households and companies, exacerbating the slump.
The key variable that changes in the DRS is the assumed rate of economic growth (Box 8.1), which affects a wide range of other modelling parameters, such as industrial output, freight shipments, construction activity, and sales and ownership levels for appliances and other energy -using equipment.
Box 8.1 ⊳ Near -term economic outlook in the Delayed Recovery Scenario In the DRS, the return of global economic activity to the level of 2019 is pushed back by two years to 2023, compared with the STEPS.
In addition, the crisis is assumed to leave some lasting scars that significantly impair the economy's longer term growth potential.
This is due in large part to the erosion of human capital, mainly as a result of an increase in long- term unemployment, but it also reflects damage to physical capital as some productive assets are retired early.
There are some permanent structural changes in the economy as consumption falls in sectors such as international tourism.
The resul t is that less progress is made in the DRS in closing the gap with the pre -crisis trajectory for gross domestic product (GDP), whereas the gap narrows by 2025 in the STEPS.
The extent of the economic shock varies across the globe; reflecting differences be tween countries in their response to the initial public health crisis, in their structural economic vulnerabilities, and in the extent of their ability to cushion the impacts of the shock on the economy (see Chapter 2, Table 2.2 for GDP growth by region an d scenario).
Figures and tables from this chapter are accessible through your IEA account : .
298 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic The overall outlook in the DRS is driven mainly by emerging market and developing economies, which accounted for over 55% of global GDP in 2019.
In China, the recovery is relatively robust, although it is slower than in the STEPS: challenges persist beyond the initial shock, and exports are subdued because of weaker demand elsewhere.
Major impacts are felt in countries that depend heavily on hydrocarbon revenue for income, notably in the Middle East.
Countries in Central and South America also see a further slowing of their growth prospects, as do India and others in South Asia.
Advanced economies in the DRS generally have greater scope to mobilise a sizeable monetary and fiscal response to the crisis, making them somewhat more resilient (Figure 8.2) .
Howev er, these economies were on a less dynamic growth path prior to the crisis, and a larger share of services in GDP also means that the economic outlook is more affected by continued containment measures and social distancing requirements.
Figure 8.2 ⊳ Real gross domestic product by scenario The global economy starts to recover later in the DRS, and lasting damage to growth potential from the pandemic means that it never makes up the lost ground Note s: 2020e = estimated values for 2020; EMDE = emerging market and developing economies.
Calculated based on GDP expressed in year -2019 dollars in purchasing power parity (ppp) terms .
The assumptions for economic growth in the SDS are the same as in the STEPS.
The pre- crisis trajectory is represented by the WEO -2019 Stated Policies Scenario projection .
Sources: IEA analysis based on Oxford Economics (2020); IMF (2020 a, 2020b ).
Stagnant economies demand fewer energy services, and energy consumption is further curtailed by increases in global inequality and poverty: those in energy poverty find it more difficult to escape, and some vulnerable groups see their position worsen.
Even though energy demand is depressed in the DRS, the adequacy of energy investment and supply is nonetheless threatened in many economies by high indebtedness and uncertainty about the future.
The uptake of cleaner and more efficient end -use technologies is dampened by strained household budgets and lower fuel prices, and clean technology development and deployment is also slowed by reduced public and corporate spending.
80 100 120 140 2018 2020e 2025Index (2019 = 100)Global real GDP Reaching 2019 levels- 15- 10- 5 EMDE Advanced economiesTrillion dollars (2019, PPP)Average annual loss versus pre -crisis, 2020 -25 DRS STEPS and SDSPre-crisis IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 299 8 Anxiety related to the virus combines with economic and financial factors to influence longer term demographic trends and consumer behaviour.
The shift towards urbanisation in some developing economies slows, as employment opportunities become scarce, and some migrant workers return to their home towns and villages in rural areas.
Advanced economies al so see a drift towards rural and suburban living, meaning larger average home sizes and more reliance on personal vehicles.
Commuters in all parts of the world tend to shy away from public transport in favour of home working – where this is possible – or travel by car or bike.
International travel stays lower for longer.
The silver linings in this scenario are few and far between.
Emissions are reduced compared with the STEPS, but, as in 2020, the reductions come at a huge social and economic cost.
The DRS offers a sharp contrast to the sustainable recovery assumed in the SDS, and serves as a plausible, cautionary illustration of the risks that the pandemic brings not just to the energy sector but also to the broader prospects for sustainable development.
8.1.1 A delayed recovery to 2030 In the DRS, the pandemic ushers in a decade with the lowest rate of global energy demand growth since the 1930s .
The initial shock in 2020 pushes the world to a lower starting point for recovery, and it is followed by an uneven recovery that affects different regions, fuels and sectors in different ways.
Fossil fuels absorb almost all the reduction in demand compared with the STEPS (Figure 8.3) .
Coal takes a large hit, with year -on-year declines to 2030 averaging 30 million tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe).
Oil and natural gas eventually return to growth, but the recovery in oil demand takes until 2027.
Most renewable energy technologies do not veer as far from the STEPS trajectory.
Even though electricity consumption falls, growth in wind and solar capacity in the power sector proves quite resilient: renewables growth is however less robust in hard- to-abate sectors such as longdistance transport and industry.
The impact on energy demand is felt most acutely in economies with relatively robust precrisis growth expectations.
By the end of the decade, total primary energy demand in both China and India is 6 -7% lower than in the STEPS.
Regions dependent on global trade, such as Southeast Asia , see reductions that are nearly as big, while more subdued economic growth slows progress in extending energy services to those most in need in sub -Saharan Africa.
Demand in the United States and the Europe Union is around 3 -4% lower than in the STEPS, and it does not recover to pre -crisis levels in either region by the end of the decade.
Capital investment in energy, in cumulative terms, is around $2.2 trillion lower over the next decade than in the STEPS, which is more than total energy sector investment in 2019.
Investment in fossil fuels is lower by around 10%, but there is no countervailing pickup in spending on low -carbon technologies.
The initial resilience of clean energy investment in the early period of the pandemic is slowed by weakening government and corporate balance sheets.
As a result, investment in low -carbon technologies is 5% lower over the next decade than in the STEPS.
300 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic Figure 8.3 ⊳ Change in energy demand in the Delayed Recovery Scenario relative to the Stated Policies Scenario The prolonged battle with the pandemic and slower economic growth pull energy demand in the DRS below the level in the STEPS, and all fossil fuels suffer large declines Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
8.1.2 Longer term outlook The most severe structural dislocations from Covid- 19 occur in the first -half of the projection period, but much of the damage sustained during a decade of subdued recovery from the pandemic leaves deep scars in the 2030s.
The longer term energy impacts of a delayed recovery from Covid -19 are still visible in 2040 in reduced rates of energy access, lower levels of efficiency and a slower turnover in capital stock (with average equipment lifetimes extended by around 20%).
The rate of energy innovation anticipated in the STEPS, which enables more productive use of energy as well as a broader uptake of advanced lowcarbon technologies, is held back.
By 2040, the global energy economy is 8% smaller than in the STEPS, and the capital allocated to low -carbon energy remains 6% lower.
A prolonged recovery means a permanent downward revision to energy production and consumption for most r egions, but the overall pattern of growth stays largely consistent with pre -crisis trajectories.
India remains the largest source of energy demand growth in our projections, with total energy use nearly 60% higher by 2040.
However, the pace of growth is si gnificantly diminished – it is around 10% below levels reached in the STEPS – as lower growth in incomes and lower levels of urbanisation dampen the increase in household consumption.
China remains the world's largest energy consumer in 2040 by a wide margin, although its energy demand grows much slower than in the STEPS, with effects felt across all fuels.
The scale of energy needs in India and China means that these two countries endure the largest downward revisions in energy demand in the DRS compared with the STEPS ( Figure 8.4) .
- 800- 600- 400- 2002020e 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030Mtoe Coal Oil Natural gas Renewables and nuclear IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 301 8 Figure 8.4 ⊳ Energy demand by sector and region in the Delayed Recovery Scenario compared with the Stated Policies Scenario The aviation, power and industry sectors see the largest long -term reductions in demand in the DRS compared with the STEPS Note: C & S America = Central and South America ; 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
Transport demand bears the brunt of the initial shock from Covid -19, and long -distance transport – notably aviation – remains lower over the longer term.
However, power generators and industrial energy users also suffer lasting damage from the prolonged nature of the recovery.
Electricity consumption in 2040 is down by 7% compared with the STEPS, and industrial activity also lags well behind the STEPS trajectory.
The impact varies by industrial sub -sector, with steel and cement seeing structural demand destruction in line with lower levels of economic activity, while segments such as packaging or agricultural fertilisers fare comparatively better because they serve less affected parts of the economy .
Prolonged virus outbreaks and slower economic recovery have major impacts on consumer sentiment and incomes, cutting into construction and retrofit activities and slowing purchases of new cars, appliances and air conditioners.
The impact is especially strong in emerging and developing economies where ownership levels are low today.
Lower household incomes limit the number of people that can afford to access these services , leading to lower residential energy demand relative to the STEPS .
By 2040, there are 50 million fewer cars on the road, 150 million fewer re frigerators have been purchased, and residential floor space is 5% lower than in the STEPS.
Also 100 million additional people remain without access to electricity in 2040, most of them in sub -Saharan Africa.
Weaker consumer purchasing power and wider econ omic malaise have a profound impact too on energy demand from commercial buildings, where lower activity levels cut demand by close to 5 %.
-10%-5%2020 2025 2030 2035 2040Changes in demand by sector AviationBuildings Road transport Shipping PowerIndustry2020e -300 -200 -100European UnionRussiaMiddle EastC & S AmericaSoutheast AsiaUnited StatesIndiaChina Oil Natural gas Coal RenewablesChanges in demand by region, 2040 Mtoe and nuclear IEA.
302 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic On the supply side, diminished demand affects all major producers, but particularly those with higher cost resources and those facing the need to attract large amounts of capital to develop new projects.
The United States remains the world's largest energy producer, but the total amount of tight oil and shale gas that is developed over the next decade is nearly 10% bel ow that in the STEPS (production is subsequently more robust in the 2030s as larger volumes of lower cost resources are developed).
With oil prices lower by $13/barrel and demand down by 4.5 million barrels per day (mb/d) in 2040 compared with the STEPS, n et income from oil and gas for major producer economies is reduced on average by around 20%.
Global gas trade is 8 % lower than in the STEPS, eliminating the need for around 85 billion cubic metres (bcm) of new liquefied natural gas (LNG) projects.
In the DRS, carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions flatten at a level below that of 2019, but the reduction relative to the trajectory in the STEPS come at a significant cost to social and economic development.
The drop in coal use in China is responsible for the majorit y of reductions in emissions relative to the STEPS in the first -half of the 2020s.
8.2 Impacts of a Delayed Recovery Scenario The DRS describes an energy world in slow motion.
Existing overcapacity persists for longer, energy -related development goals are postponed, investment is more muted and, even though CO 2 emissions are down compared with the STEPS, this is purely attributable to a smaller economy rather than any additional structural change in how energy is produced or consumed.
In this section, we review the main implications by fuel and technology.
8.2.1 Oil In the DRS, the extended fight to get the pandemic under control prolongs the turmoil in oil markets and results in lower oil demand than in the STEPS.
The effects of a lacklustre economic and trade outlook weigh on all segments of oil consumption.
However, there are also some countervailing factors in the DRS that limit the decline in demand in some areas: the pace of fuel efficiency improvement is diminished as the turnover in the car stock slows, and a preference for using private cars rather than public transport is sustained for longer.
Although electric vehicle (EV) sales are not dramatically affected , the uptake of alternative transport fuels remains subdued in the DRS.
Demand in the DRS takes unti l 2027 to get back to pre -crisis levels, four years later than in the STEPS, and flattens at just under 100 mb/d, which is around 4 mb/d lower than in the STEPS.
Oil use for cars, buildings and petrochemicals sees a relatively low level of reduction relati ve to the STEPS, while industry, road freight, shipping and aviation are more heavily affected by the economic downturn ( Figure 8.5).
A slower recovery affects the size of the global car fleet, which is 3% smaller by 2030 relative to the STEPS.
The transition towards electro -mobility continues to be driven by strong mandates and targets , which are taken into account in the DRS even though the IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 303 8 economics of these choices are weakened by lower fuel prices.
S ales of electric cars in the DRS remain similar to those in the STEPS.
Deferr ed new car purchases by first -time buyers due to lower economic growth also lead to a reduction of oil use by 0.3 mb/d in 2030.
Figure 8.5 ⊳ Global oil demand by scenario and sector to 2030 Oil demand in the DRS takes much longer to get back to 2019 levels; cars, buildings and petrochemicals are relativel y less affected by the prolonged pandemic than other sectors Note : 2020e = estimated values for 2020; petchem = petrochemical feedstock .
However, this effect is offset by some other trends in car size and in the pace of car fleet replacement .
As more people choose to stay and live away from the bigger cities, there is a shift in preference in favour of larger cars such as sport utility vehicles .
As analysed in Chapter 5, the economic recession also leads existing car owners to delay purchases o f replacement vehicles .
These trend s have implications for the rate of improvement in the fuel economy of the global car fleet : average fuel economy in the DRS is 2% lower than in the STEPS by 2030 .
This offsets most of the reductions in oil use arising fr om lower aggregate driving and a resilient share of EVs, and the result is that the level of oil consumption in cars in 2030 is similar to that in the STEPS.
Some other sectors also see oil use being pushed in multiple directions in the DRS.
In the residen tial sector, for example, oil use is supressed by the effect of lower incomes; the 80 90 100 110 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030mb/dPre-crisis STEPS Reaching 2019 levelsDRS SDS 2020e -10%-8%-6%-4%-2%Total Cars Buildings Petchem Industry Trucks Ships AviationReduction in o il demand in the DRS relative to the S TEPS, 2030 IEA.
304 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic disproportionate effects of a weaker economy on low income groups also mean a lower level of switching away from the traditional use of biomass to liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as a cooking fuel.
However, there are offsetting factors, as the replacement of oil -fired boilers slows and as people that move away from urban areas (and beyond the reach of the gas networks) install and use oil for heating.
Taken together, oil demand in the buildings sector in 2030 is only slightly lower in the DRS than in the STEPS.
In the petrochemical sector, the prolonged health crisis leads to less re -use of plastics, more use of single -use plastics, and (as a result of increased reliance on e -commerce) more use of packaging materials.
Temporary setbacks in plastics policies and recycling in 2020 also last longer in this scenario, and the net result is an uptick in plastics demand from 2021 .
This additional demand offsets some of the reduction fo r those elements of petrochemical production that are heavily affected by the macroeconomic downturn, including those used in manufacturing, construction and vehicles.
The net result is a moderate reduction in oil use for petrochemicals of 2.5% in 2030 rel ative to the STEPS.
However, there are also some sectors where demand is much more closely tied to the overall economic outlook and is pulled down by lower economic and trade activities.
Oil demand in road freight, shipping and industry sees a reduction of around 5 -7% in 2030 compared with the STEPS, while aviation oil demand is additionally affected by a sustained shift away from leisure travel and by the use of video conferences in place of business travel, which together cut demand by a further 0.7 mb/d.
There are also divergences in oil demand trends between regions.
Oil demand in advanced economies in 2030 in the DRS is around 2.5% lower than in the STEPS; it is however 4% lower in emerging market and developing economies.
Most of the countervailing fa ctors mentioned have larger impacts in advanced economies, where assumed progress on efficiency improvement is slower and behavioural changes that lead to more consumption (e.g.
bigger cars, larger homes, more packaging materials) are more likely to come i nto play.
On the supply side, there is already a divergence in the STEPS between those low cost producer economies that look better placed to cope with the impact of low oil prices and those that are already feeling acute financial strains.
This divergence is amplified in the oil supply projections of the DRS, in which a weakened global economy heightens the risks for those countries under strain.
Countries which combine a large population, a high degree of dependence on hydrocarbon revenues for fiscal spending, and limited financial buffers are likely to be among the most vulnerable.
The prospects for resource -rich countries currently in a very deep economic slump, such as Venezuela, look particularly bleak.
Successful economic diversification would be much more difficult for all types of producer economy in the strained global circumstances of the DRS (Box 8.2).
US tight oil also feels the effect of lower oil prices ( Figure 8.6).
Many years of negative cash flow have already made access to financing more constrained than before, pushing up costs.
In the DRS, p rolonged economic pressure and low oil prices (in the $50s/bbl for most IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 305 8 of the 2020s) mean that regaining investor confidence is a drawn -out process.
While tight oil production recovers to pre -crisis levels by 2022, output grows at a slower pace and remains 1 mb/d below the level in the STEPS in 2030 before flattening through to 2040.
The weakened outlook for tight oil in this scenario implies that in the future it would provide less of a buffer to absorb potential supply shocks in global oil markets.
Relatively high cost producers and those seeking to develop more complex or r emote projects are squeezed out by the decline in output in the DRS relative to the STEPS.
Output in Canada stalls at 2019 levels as new project approvals dry up, and the considerable capital outlays required for deepwater projects in Brazil constrain new production there too.
The divergence is also visible in the refining industry where companies are already feeling the pinch from a major overhang in capacity.
Refinery runs in 2030 in the DRS are 4% lower than in the STEPS, but the run cuts are concentrat ed on less competitive regions (e.g.
Europe) rather than evenly distributed across regions, adding to the pressures on older and less advantaged refiners (see Chapter 7).
Figure 8.6 ⊳ Reduction in oil production by selected regions in the Delayed Recovery Scenario relative to the Stated Policies Scenario, 2030 The reductions in output in the DRS relative to the STEPS are focused on higher cost su pply, assets that struggle to gain investor confidence, and countries struggling for fiscal space Note: OPEC = Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
8.2.2 Electricity A less prosperous long -term economic outlook has profound implications for electricity demand.
In the DRS, a sharper demand reduction in the near term and slower growth thereafter puts global electricity demand at 27 000 terawatt- hours (TWh) in 2030, which is 6% below the level in the STEPS ( Figure 8.7).
This difference between the DRS and STEPS is equivalent to twice total electricity demand in Japan in 2019.
The reduced level of demand 90 92 94 96 98 100 STEPS United StatesCanada OPEC Russia Rest of worldDRSmb/dRest of OPEC Nigeria Iran Iraq Saudi Arabia IEA.
306 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic in the DRS stems from lower activity levels, which depress demand for services and industrial products, and from lower incomes, which make previous levels of consumption unaffordable for many, and especially for those with the lowest levels of income (see section 8.3 .3 on Inequalities and energy access).
Delays in electrifying heat in industry and buildings also contribute to lower electricity demand in the DRS.
Residential electricity demand is pushed up by more people working from home in the DRS, but this is more t han offset by the effect of lower household incomes.
Figure 8.7 ⊳ Global electricity demand by scenario and sector to 2030 Global electricity d emand in the DRS is 6 % below STEPS in 2030, primarily because of lower activity levels due to the extended economic slowdown Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
Electricity meets many of the most income sensitive energy needs of households, such as air conditioning and appliance use .
In the DRS, lower household incomes relative to the STEPS push electricity use in 2030 in the residential and services sectors 7% lower than in the STEPS.
The DRS also brings reduced demand for new buildings together wit h lower ownership levels and slower turnover of appliances and cars.
This dampens demand for steel, cement and aluminium, and leads to industrial electricity demand in 2030 being 7% lower than in the STEPS.
18 22 26 30 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030Thousand TWhPre-crisis STEPS Reaching 2019 levelsDRSSDS 2020e - 8%- 6%- 4%- 2%Total Others Transport Services Industry ResidentialReduction in electricity demand in the DRS relative to the S TEPS, 2030 IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 307 8 The use of electricity in transport is 5% lower in the DRS than in the STEPS in 2030.
The transition towards EVs is mainly reliant on policy mandates and strict environmental targets, and these are assumed to remain in place even in the case of a delayed recovery.
Electric car sales in 2020 have already proved to be relatively resilient: t he el ectric car market is smaller than that for conventional cars, and potential buyers tend to be in income groups that have been less affected by the crisis.
At the regional level, the effects of a delayed recovery on electricity demand chiefly depend on exi sting levels of industrial energy use and on household purchasing power.
For example, in the United States, where appliance ownership levels are already very high and most industrial processes are already electrified, electricity demand in 2030 is 5% lower in the DRS than in the STEPS.
In India, where lower income households are less able to afford new appliances and electrification of industry is still at an early stage, the equivalent figure is 10%.
On the supply side, clean energy transitions in electri city supply gets a small boost from a combination of depressed electricity demand and relatively robust growth for renewables.
The share of renewables in generation rises to 40% by 2030, up from about 30% in 2020, and is a few percentage points higher than in the STEPS.
N uclear power's share of generation is almost unchanged (see section 8.2.6).
Coal - and gas -fired generation are most affected by the delayed recovery, continuing the pattern set in 2020 during the initial lockdowns.
Renewable energy technologies are the most resilient sources of electricity in the DRS, as they have been during the initial Covid -19 crisis.
After a modest increase in 2020, generation from renewables rises by 63% to 2030 in the DRS, compared with 66% in the STEPS ( Figure 8.8).
The robust performance of renewables in the near term reflects very low operating costs and priority access to grids in most markets; in the longer term it stems from competitive costs and policy support mechanisms in 166 countries (REN21, 2020).
Government policies that target higher shares of renewables lead to significant growth, even with depressed energy and electricity demand.
Wind and solar PV growth are central to meeting stated goals in most regions, including 2030 targets in the European Union (32% of gross final consumption), Japan (22 -24% of electricity supply) and India (60% of power capacity), as well as renewable portfolio standards in 30 US states, Washington DC and three territories.
China has also established large domestic solar PV and wind industries to diversify its power mix.
However, there are risks to the projected growth of renewables.
Corporate buyers could become less willing to enter into direct purchase agreements for generation from renewables.
Supply chains for wind and solar PV have been disrupted by the Covid -19 crisis, and getting them back into full service may be more difficult than expected, especially if the public health and economic recovery is slow in particular countries.
Distributed solar PV could be especially badly affected by prolonged outbreaks of the virus, as was the case in the first -half of 2020.
308 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic Figure 8.8 ⊳ Electricity generation mix in the Delayed Recovery Scenario relative to the Stated Policies Scenario A delayed recovery hits coal -fired power hardest; renewables see robust growth, and low gas prices provide some support for gas -fired power Note s: 2020e = estimates values for 2020; C & S America = Central and South America .
Other renewables includes geothermal, concentrating solar power, bioenergy and marine.
Coal -fired generation is hit harder than any other electricity source in the DRS.
After an 10% drop in 2020, coal -fired generation declines by another 8% to 2030 in this scenario, compared with an increase of 2% in the STEPS.
The conditions that have led to a squeeze of coal i n 2020 continue for much of the next decade in the DRS: depressed electricity demand, rising use of renewables and very strong cost competition from gas -fired power plants all drive down coal -fired generation.
This has three effects on coal.
First, there i s less new coal -fired capacity: the DRS sees about 220 gigawatts (GW) of new capacity constructed by 2030 compared with 330 GW in the STEPS.
Second, there are more retirements of existing coal -fired power plants, mostly in advanced economies, where cheap natural gas weakens the financial prospects for coal: the DRS sees an extra 15 GW of retirements by 2030 on top of the 440 GW wave of retirements in the STEPS.
Third, the utilisation of coal- fired capacity is notably reduced: global capacity factors are 49% in 2030 in the DRS compared with 53% in the STEPS.
Since contracted prices for coal -fired generation have usually been based on utilisation rates of 60% or higher, this could create financial difficulties for coal- fired capacity in regulated markets such as China, India and Southeast Asia.
5 10 15 20 2019 2020e STEPS 2030DRS 20302019 2020e STEPS 2030DRS 2030Thousand TWh Coal Natural gas Oil Nuclear Hydro Wind Solar PV Other renewablesFossil fuels Low emissions -700 -600 -500 -400 -300 -200 -100Middle EastAfricaEuropean UnionC & S AmericaSoutheast AsiaUnited StatesIndiaChinaChange in the DRS relative to the STEPS, 2030 TWh IEA.
Chapter 8 | A dela yed recovery 309 8 Despite low natural gas prices, gas -fired electricity generation also takes a significant blow from a delayed recovery.
After a 5% reduction in global gas -fired generation in 2020, the delayed recovery in the DRS mean s that it takes five years for gas use in power to return to pre-crisis levels.
In 2030, global gas -fired generation is 8% below the level in STEPS, with the reduction split fairly evenly between advanced economies and emerging market and developing econom ies.
Gas- fired generation is squeezed alongside coal everywhere by the rise of renewables and other low -emission technologies and by lower electricity demand growth.
In emerging market and developing economies, about 10% less gas -fired capacity is built by 2030 due to lower electricity demand growth.
Prolonged periods of low demand in the DRS combined with continuing growth of solar PV and wind lead to increased flexibility requirements as compared with the STEPS.
Both traditional and new resources to meet these needs are affected to varying degrees by a delayed recovery, and continuous vigilance is required to keep the lights on.
Despite delays in clean energy projects and the persistence of supply -side bottlenecks in the DRS, battery storage deployment increases hand -in-hand with the increased deployment of variable renewables, and is particularly well suited to address the need for short -term flexibility.
Battery storage remains competitive with other options to increase flexibility in this scenario, and the global capacity of battery storage installed in the system by 2030 is only 5% lower than in the STEPS.
The case for battery storage is particularly strong in India, where ambitious plans for renewables, in particular solar PV, call for significant addi tional power sector flexibility , especially in periods of low demand and high ramping.
How expensive would a delayed recovery in grid investment prove to be for electricity security?
A delayed recovery poses additional risks to timely investment in electricity networks and, in turn, to the efficiency and security of electricity supply.
El ectricity networks have a vital role to play in unlocking the low -carbon transition in electricity, but this role requires them to become smart, digital and flexib le, and that requires significant capital investment.
Even with lower electricity demand in the DRS, average grid investment needs over the next decade are around $3 70 billion per year globally, which represents an increase of around one-third on recent levels.
At the same time, revenues for grid operators are depressed by lower electricity demand, leading to a slower pace of new construction that could ultimately be costly in terms of electricity security.
After a decline in 2020, grid investments need to rebound swiftly to pre -crisis levels, even in the DRS.
Of the total that needs to be invested each year through to 2030 in the DRS, about 55% is for line replace ment and the digitali sation of existing lines , over 40% for expanding networks to meet new demand, and the remaining portion for accommodating rising gene ration from renewables.
S pending on public EV charging SPOTLIGHT IEA.
310 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic infrastructure adds around $20 billion year on average.
Grid investment needs through to 2030 are over 9% lower in the DRS than in the STEPS, largely as a result of the lower level of electricity demand growth; this brings the estimated network -related manufacturing and construction jobs in this scenario by around 7% compared with the STEPS.
Lower revenues for network operators could compromise their ability to invest in upgrade works and maintenance.
In the DRS, lower electricity demand (6 % below the STEPS in 2030) and fewer new power plants mean that estimated global revenues for grid operators in 2030 are some 10% less than in the STEPS (Figure 8.9).
In some advanced economies, such as Canada, France, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom and United State, revenues i n the DRS return to pre -crisis levels only after 2030.
Figure 8.9 ⊳ Impact of a longer pandemic on global grid investments and revenues Electricity networks still require over $200 billion in average annual investment in the DRS to cope with refurbishments, digitalisation and to support renewables and E Vs Electricity transmission and distribution network operators recover the bulk of their costs by charging system users a tariff for transporting or distributing electricity.
These tariffs, which form a major revenue stream for network operators, are highly sensitive to expectations of total electricity flows.
Deviation from these expectations can leave network operators in financial difficulty .
Traditionally, regulatory authorities allowed operators to recover these revenue shortfalls in future periods.
With a delayed economic recovery, it may not be possible to do so without overburdening consumers, in which case network operators could face an extended period of reduced cash flow.
A combination of rising investment needs and reduced cash flow would lead to difficult choices and could lead to inadequate investment , with significant impli cations for electricity security.
10%20%30%40%50% 100 200 300 400 500Billion dollars (2019) Replacement New lines Public EV STEPS Share ofInvestments chargers digital (right axis)2021 -25 2026 -30 DRS:2016 -2080100120140160 2019 2025 2030Index (2019 = 100)Revenues Reaching 2019 levelsSTEPS DRS IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 311 8 8.2.3 Natural gas Natural gas demand continues to grow in the DRS, but much less strongly than in the STEPS.
Demand does not recover to 2019 levels until 2024, which is later than in the STEPS, after which the gap between the STEPS and DRS widens further until it reaches 6% in 2040 (Figure 8.10 ).
The gap is wider for gas than for oil, where there are countervailing forces propping up transport demand: there are fewer such counterweights in power generation or industry that might push gas consumption upward in the DRS.
Figure 8.10 ⊳ Global natural gas demand by scenario and sector to 2030 The DRS sees a pronounced adjustment to global gas demand, with power and industry – the two largest consumption sectors – facing the largest falls compared with the STEPS Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
In advanced economies, gas use is affected by declining electricity consumption and subdued industrial activity.
In the United States, consumption peaks in the late 2020s, after which it sees a slow decline to 2040.
In the European Union, gas demand – already in structural decline in the STEPS – falls to 320 bcm in 2040, nearly a quarter below 2019 levels.
Gas is particularly hard hit in the power sector, where the share of renewables increases as electricity demand falls back relative to the STEPS and marginal thermal power 3 0003 5004 0004 5005 000 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030bcm Pre-crisis STEPS DRS SDS Reaching 2019 levels 2020e -8%-6%-4%-2%Total Other Buildings IndustryPower generationReduction in natural gas demand in the DRS relative to the S TEPS, 2030 IEA.
312 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic generation plants reduce their operations.
The opportunity for gas to fill the space left by retiring coal and nuclear capacity is closed off by lower electricity demand, meaning the uptick in gas use anticipated in the STEPS in the mid -2020s is much less pronounced.
In emerging market and developing economies, prolonged fallout from the pandemic knocks gas demand down to a lower starting point, and then limits the pace of growth to an average annu al rate of 2.2% from 2020 to 2030, compared with 2.7% in the STEPS.
The weaker macroeconomic outlook limits the capital available to both utilities and industrial gas consumers to undertake major infrastructure investments, while subdued global trade in g oods reduces incentives for export -oriented industries to take advantage of lower commodity prices.
Around $7 billion per year less on average is spent on regasification, transmission and distribution networks than in the STEPS.
A delayed recovery has a particularly marked effect on the expansion of gas use in industry, the largest growth sector in the STEPS projections, with diminished demand for raw materials for goods such as steel and cement reducing the need for gas in energy -intensive segments.
The lower outlook for demand weighs heavily on global gas balances, prolonging the supply surplus until the early 2030s and keeping regional prices around 10% lower than in the STEPS.
Although prices recover from the record lows of 2020, they remain well below recent pre -Covid peaks: low spot prices drag the weighted average import costs in Asia and Europe below $8 per million British thermal units (MBtu) over the next decade.
Growth in global gas trade slows to a third of the rate seen over the last five years, and ends up almost 10% below the levels reached in the STEPS in 2040.
Figure 8.11 ⊳ Change in natural gas export revenue in selected regions in the Delayed Recovery Scenario relative to the Stated Policies Scenario, 2020-2040 In the DRS, around $1 trillion of cumulative revenue is lost to gas exporters to 2040 compared with the STEPS, with emerging producers in Africa particularly affected -30%-20%-10% -300-200-100 Russia Middle EastAfrica Australia United StatesBillion dollars (2019)2020-30 2030-40 As percentage of annual average revenue in STEPS (right axis) IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 313 8 This places significant strains on the balance sheets of export -oriented gas producers.
Portfolio players seeking to market their supplies on a short -term basis are particularly hard hit as fewer buyers require additional volumes above take -or-pay commitme nts, while narrower price differentials between markets further reduce arbitrage opportunities.
Longterm contracts with gas prices pegged to oil provide a measure of protection for incumbent exporters, but over 150 bcm worth of contracts are due to expire over the next five years, leaving some producers facing greater exposure to spot markets.
Crude oil remains on average 15% cheaper than in the STEPS, further eroding margins.
Overall, cumulative revenue from global gas exports is lower by some $1 trillion over the projection period, or around 20% of total sales, relative to the STEPS ( Figure 8.11 ).
As fewer volumes of gas are required over the long -term, the loss in revenue disproportionately affects aspiring producers that face lengthier development timelines to monetise new gas finds ; these are located mainly offshore in Africa.
A delayed recovery also casts a long shadow over the economics of already sanctioned gas projects expected to come online in the next few years.
Approximately 40% of LNG projects under construction require a breakeven gas price above $8/MBtu in order to be profitable, higher than the gas price levels reached in the DRS in the 2020s.
Existing producers also feel the pinch, as average LNG terminal utilisation rates globally fall to around 80% over the next decad e. This is less of a downward adjustment than implied by long -run project economics, largely because, rather than shut in production, higher cost producers generally opt to sell into the market as long as they can cover short -run costs of production.
This exacerbates the glut and keeps prices low, while also preventing several project sponsors from recovering their invested capital.
Amid these more challenging conditions, the DRS still sees a need for new gas export infrastructure beyond what has already been sanctioned: around 250 bcm of new LNG capacity is required by 2040, primarily to cover demand growth in developing Asian markets.
Some inter -regional gas pipelines are also projected to expand, notably additional spurs between Russia and China.
However, the revenue shortfall affecting both existing projects and those under construction exacerbates financing strains – already visible in the STEPS – for new export projects.
Significantly diminished balance sheets close off options such as equity participation or balance sheet financing.
More established routes such as project financing are likewise less viable, given a more limited pool of creditworthy buyers willing to sign new deals amid greater uncertainty around their long -term demand requirements.
As equity dries up, there is a parallel drop in enthusiasm among lenders for capital -intensive, long lead -time projects.
Even though demand is lower than in STEPS, these developments could have longer term implications for gas security.
8.2.4 Coal Coal demand tak es a further hit in the DRS, accelerating the declining trend projected in the STEPS for all regions except parts of South and Southeast Asia.
Global coal use falls to around 4 500 million tonnes of coal equivalent (Mtce) in 2030; this is 9% lower than in the STEPS, and represents a bigger fall compared with the STEPS than for all other fuels IEA.
314 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic (Figure 8.12 ).
As noted, lower electricity demand has a disprop ortionate effect on coal in the DRS, and more than 60% of global coal consumption is in the power sector.
Coal use for power ( -12% versus STEPS in 2030) is more severely affected than coal use in industry (-6%), the latter being brought down by a lower level of construction activities in the DRS that dampens coal use for the production of steel and cement.
Figure 8.12 ⊳ Global coal demand by scenario and sector to 2030 Further declines in coal consumption in the DRS are concentrated in the power sector, where coal suffers more than other fuels from lower electricity demand relative to the STEPS Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020 .
The lower demand outlook is particularly visible in regions where a structural decline in coal use is already underway.
In the European Union and the United States, demand drops by about half between 2020 and 2030, and by 60% from pre -crisis levels, as coal gives way to renewables, and to a lesser extent, natural gas in oversupplied markets.
In China, a delayed recovery leads to a decline in demand of 10% from 2019 by 2030, compared with a decline of only 3% in the STEPS, but coal remains by far the largest component of China's energy mix as well as its electricity mix.
In India, after three years of declines in 2019, 2020 and 2021, coal demand grows by 3% per year through to 2030, but it is nevertheless some 15% lower in 2030 than in the STEPS.
2 0003 0004 0005 0006 000 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030Mtce Pre-crisis STEPS DRS SDS 2020e -12%-8%-4%Total Industry AluminiumIron and steel CementPower generationReduction in coal demand in the DRS relative to the S TEPS, 2030 IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 315 8 Unfavourabl e prospects for the coal market create additional challenges for the supply industry.
In China, the recent spate of approvals for new mines risks a renewed overhang in capacity in the DRS.
This could prompt another round of restructuring in a sector that experienced the closure of a number of smaller, less productive mines during major upheaval in 2016- 17 (IEA, 2020a).
US output falls by 60% from 2019 to 2030, a decline in production that is much larger than the decline in the use of coal in the United Stat es because demand from its export customer base in the Atlantic market also shrinks.
In the DRS, India is the only producer that sees an increase in output.
The supply trends are reflected in the projections for investment in coal supply, which is pushed d own below $50 billion per year on average to 2030, down by 5% from the STEPS and by almost half from the level in 2019 (although still twice as much as in the SDS).
The fall in supply and demand is also reflected in lower volumes of internationally traded coal in the DRS compared with the STEPS, with 70% of this reduction affecting steam coal (because of the link to demand in the power sector).
The main falls in imports are seen in India, both as a result of reduced consumption and a desire to prioritise domestic production and employment.
Consequently, even an export -oriented producer like Australia, one of the few countries whose coal exports are relatively resilient in the STEPS, does not bring back exports to the pre -crisis levels.
Most exporters, notab ly the United States and Indonesia, see an even sharper decline.
8.2.5 Renewables Outside the power sector, where renewables growth remains strong, the prospects for end-use renewable technologies are highly contingent on policy measures and long -term environmental targets, especially in a lower fuel price scenario such as the DRS.
Announced policy measures in different countries are assumed to remain in place in this scenario (as in the STEPS), but the total consumption of renewables directly used in buildings, transport and industry nonetheless is pulled down over 4%, in lockstep with the overall fall in total final energy consumption ( Figure 8.13 ).
This refle cts that the majority of end -use renewable policies are blending requirements.
In the transport sector, total biofuel demand in 2030 stays similar to levels in the STEPS, owing to oil demand in passenger cars rebounding quickly.
This drives up the overall share of biofuels in transport in the DRS, since gasoline blending for passenger cars is more pervasive than blending for other fuels.
Biofuels demand for aviation and shipping stays low for longer as modes rebound more slowly.
In the industry sector, ble nding policies link biogas demand to total industrial demand for natural gas, resulting in bioenergy demand growing slower in the DRS.
In the buildings sector, strains on household budgets as well as the lower price environment for fossil fuels slows the penetration of renewable energy technologies in the DRS; turnover of the appliance stock slows, and fewer biomass boilers and solar water heaters are installed.
In addition, many emerging market and developing economies see a slower move away from the traditional use of solid biomass for cooking (see section 8.3.3).
This means that fewer people shift to cleaner cooking fuels, including clean bioenergy options.
316 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic Figure 8.13 ⊳ Global total final consumption of renewables by scenario, 2030 Slower growth in the direct use of renewables drives an overall decline in renewable s. Indirect use of renewables declines less, due to rising share of renewables in electricity.
8.2.6 Nuclear Nuclear power is relatively unaffected by the challenging conditions of the DRS, though downward pressure on generation is increased in all markets.
With a delayed recovery, nuclear power generation recovers to pre -crisis levels by 2026 and then modestly increases, very much as it does in the STEPS.
By 2030, global nuclear power output is just 3% lower in the DRS than the STEPS.
Nuclear power expansion programmes are insulated to a large degr ee from reductions in electricity demand because of their long development and construction periods.
Once built, the low operating costs of nuclear power plants help them endure temporary downturns in market conditions.
In advanced economies, the fate of a geing fleets of nuclear reactors is the primary question.
Harsher market conditions lead to fewer assumed lifetime extensions in the DRS in the United States, Japan and France in particular, even though the justification for extending the lifetime of exist ing nuclear reactors is strengthened in several respects.
For those countries that remain open to nuclear power but face tighter budget restrictions, lifetime extensions are one of the cheapest forms of low -carbon electricity and have modest investment req uirements ($500 million to $1.1 billion per gigawatt).
They also require limited grid investment, at most calling for upgrades of existing lines rather than entirely new grid connections.
In emerging market and developing economies, decisions to go ahead with new nuclear power plants (beyond those already under construction) could slow in the face of lower long -term electricity demand expectations and capital availability restrictions.
Excess power capacity present today in these markets is more persistent in the DRS, and priority may be given to other fuel sources linked to domestic industries.
6%12%18%24% 200 400 600 800 STEPS DRS STEPS DRS STEPS DRSMtoeIndirect Geothermal Solar thermal Other end-use renewables Modern bioenergy Share in final consumption (right axis)Transport Industry Buildings IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 317 8 A delayed recovery puts significant pressure on new large -scale nuclear power projects, but could open up opportunities for smaller scale designs.
A number of p rojects in Europe and the United States have required capital investment in excess of $10 billion and well over a decade to develop and build, and projects of this kind are likely to find financing more difficult in the DRS.
However, the DRS could lead to mor e interest in small modular reactors, since they require lower levels of capital investment, can be scaled to electricity demand growth in smaller markets, and may provide a higher degree of flexibility, thus helping to integrate rising shares of wind and solar PV power.
8.2.7 Efficiency A world with a deeper recession is one that also sees a slower pace of efficiency improvements.
Governments, companies and households are all hesitant about committing financial resources to new, more efficient technologies; in the absence of a strong new policy push on efficiency (which is not assumed in the DRS), this means that existing assets such as household appliances, cars and industrial equipment get used for longer (Figure 8.14 ).
In the DRS, global energy intensity by 2030 is 0.083 tonne of oil equivalent (toe) per $1 000 GDP, some 3% worse than in the STEPS and a long way off the 0.068 toe/$1 000 GDP reached by this date in the SDS.
The slower pace of efficiency improvements is visible across all regions, but is slightly more pronounced in emerging market and developing economies.
Figure 8.14 ⊳ CAAGR of key energy intensity and efficiency indicators by sector and scenario, 2020-2030 Energy intensity improvements slow the most in passenger cars and services in the DRS, but they also fall in other sectors; subdued turnover is the major cause in all cases Notes: CAAGR = compound average annual growth rate.
Energy efficiency indicators by sector are: energy intensity of sectoral value added for industry; average fuel efficiency for passenger cars; annual ener gy use per square metre of floor space for residential buildings; and energy intensity of sectoral value added for services.
0.5% 1.0% 1.5% 2.0% 2.5%Industry Passenger cars Residential ServicesSTEPS DRS IEA.
318 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic In the buildings sector, extended use of outdated or less efficient appliances and equipment in the DRS leads to an overall rise of around 1% in residential energy demand in 2030 compared to the equipment usage and replacement trends in the STEPS.
Ho useholds do not replac e (or take longer to replace) an old refrigerator with a new one that could be twice as efficient, or an inefficien t oil or gas boiler with a more efficient design or a heat pump.
Holding onto existing goods for longer translates into reduced consumer investment in efficiency improvements: this pushes up demand for fossil fuels for residential energy use by some 20 Mtoe in 2030, and increases electricity demand for appliances and space cooling by over 50 TWh in 2030.
The resulting higher energy use also has repercussions for the energy bills paid by consumers, which constitutes a significant downside in a scenario where households are coping with lower incomes.
Over reliance on the existing capital stock is also a feature of the transport and industry sectors.
In transport, as noted in the discussion on oil, deferred decisions to purchase new vehicles in combination with a shift in consumer preferences towards heavier vehicles are mainly responsible for a slower pace of improvement in the average fuel efficiency of the global car fleet, which is 2 % lower than in the STEPS by 2030.
In the industry sector, too, prolonged lifetimes for existing machinery and equipment hamper progress on energy efficiency.
Moreover, much of the untapped potential for energy efficiency improvements in the industry secto r lies with small - and medium -size companies in the light industries segment, and the financial strain on these enterprises becomes even greater in the context of a delayed recovery, making it less likely that they will be able to invest in enhanced efficiency measures.
Between 2019 and 2030, the industrial sector sees its total energy intensity reduce by only 1.3% per year in the DRS, compared with 1.5% in the STEPS.
8.3 Implications of a Delayed Recovery Scenario 8.3.1 Energy security On the surface, the DRS could be characterised as a relatively low risk scenario for energy security.
Energy demand is lower, creating a longer period of overcapacity on the supply side and easing potential concerns about the adequacy of investment.
Prices are likewise lower than in the STEPS, meaning that the affordability of energy could also be seen as less of an immediate concern.
However, these factors do not remove hazards to the security of energy supply in the DRS.
The price declines and the sharp cuts in investment seen in 2 020 are a natural market response to near -term excess capacity in many markets and profound uncertainty over how long it will last.
However, there are few guarantees that the slump in investment, and therefore in future supply, will be proportional to the demand shock; demand is set to fall in 2020 by around 6%, but energy investment by a much larger 18%, and investment in oil and gas supply by as much as one -third.
This creates a risk of market volatility as markets rebalance.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 319 8 In the case of oil and gas, the effects of the deeper slump projected in the DRS could well be destabilising for some major resource -rich countries, which are already feeling substantial strains in 2020 and continue to do so in the STEPS.
In some cases, this could lead to a lasting co nstraint on the ability to ramp up investments again if needed.
Moreover, the potential difficulties for these resource -rich countries are not limited to a further decline in oil and gas income relative to the STEPS; the prospects of them successfully dive rsifying their economies are also diminished by the gloomy international economic context ( Box 8.2 ).
Box 8.2 ⊳ Diversification becomes even tougher for producer economies The income from oil and gas sales available to major producer economies over the period to 2030 in our scenarios has been shrinking steadily in successive World Energy Outlook s (WEOs ) as equilibrium prices in the STEPS have been revised down (Figure 8.15 ).
The six economies included in this analysis1 are a diverse group, varying considerably by size and circumstances, but all have been affected by major swings in hydrocarbon revenues over the last decade.
The DRS would further decrease the net income available to them over the period to 2030: cumulati ve net income for these producers from oil and gas production is 18% ($1.3 trillion) lower than in the STEPS.
Iraq, Venezuela (both 25%) and Nigeria (20%) see the largest percentage declines, which come on top of what is already a tough outlook for them in the STEPS.
The precise vulnerabilities vary by country, but a common denominator is that these revenue declines would make the task of maintaining key public services and economic growth even more challenging, while also reducing the funding available fo r capital investment across all sectors of the economy.
Recognising this challenge, which is heightened in many cases by the need to create jobs for large, youthful populations, or to create the conditions for the private sector to do so, many producers ha ve made commitments to reform and diversify their economies.
However, this task also becomes much more difficult in the straitened circumstances of the DRS.
When considering the (relatively few) examples of countries that have successfully diversified awa y from high reliance on oil and gas, a few features stand out.
One is that the main element of non -oil growth in countries such as Indonesia and Mexico did not come from the state recycling oil revenues.
Rather it came from export -oriented manufacturing, often based on foreign direct investment, which fostered networks of domestically owned medium -size suppliers.
Labour- intensive services like tourism have often played a significant role as well.
However, these channels would be much more difficult to navig ate in a scenario like the DRS.
Export -oriented manufacturing would be harder to build in a weakened global economy in which global supply chains might come under significant strain, while tourism would be in a sustained downturn.
In a world characterised by over -supply of almost everything, it would be much harder to find market niches in which new entrants can be competitive.
1 Iraq, Nigeria, Russia , Saudi Arabia , United Arab Emirates and Venezuela .
320 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic Figure 8.15 ⊳ Net income from oil and gas in selected producer economies in successive World Energy Outlook scenarios for 2020-2030 The DRS intensifies and prolongs financial strains for key producer economies, while creating a more difficult context for successful economi c diversification Notes: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
Net income from oil and gas is defined as the difference between the costs of oil and gas production, including a normal return on capital, and the value realised from its sale on either domestic or international markets.
This net income changes over time and between various scenario projections, depending on the cost and volume of production, as well as both the international and domestic price, including any applicable energy subsidies.
In addition to the country risks, t here are uncertainties about the shape of the post -crisis energy industry and its financial strength, strategic orientation and appetite for risk (Box 8.3).
For example, US tight oil has emerged in recent years as an important shock absorber for oil markets; whether or not a shale industry that has lost investor confidence in the crisis will be in a position to continue this role in the DRS is open to question.
In gas markets, many importing economies – far less certain of their seasonal or long -term demand requirements – would be likely in the DRS to show a g reater inclination to contract their gas requirements on a short -term basis.
The result would be a market more reliant on spot trade for the duration of the glut but without the means to incentivise the capitalintensive investment that forms the backbone of gas supply.
As with oil and gas markets, electricity security may seem to become more straightforward with a delayed recovery, as lower electricity demand means both that existing capacity is more capable of meeting demand and that less investment is needed to maintain adequate supply and to shift to clean energy.
Clean energy transitions receive a small boost as growth in renewables combined with depressed electricity demand goes further to reduce coal-fired generation.
300 600 9001 200 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020eBillion dollars (2019) Russia Saudia Arabia Iraq United Arab Emirates Nigeria VenezuelaAnnual average net income, 2020 -30 WEO -2020WEO -2018 WEO -2019 STEPS DRS IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 321 8 However, a deeper look reveals significant additional risks in the power sector.
In most cases, the financial health of generators is worse in the DRS than in the STEPS, as large swathes of dispatchable power plants could be rendered uneconomic by market conditions or reduced operations.
While this may present opportunities to accelerate the transformation of the sector, it also creates risks for the adequacy of electricity supply if too many generators are permanently shut in short order.
Financial pressures could also squeeze expenditure on maintenance, efficiency upgrades and additional pollution controls.
Maintaining and expanding the flexibility of electricity supply, which is the cornerstone of mode rn electricity security and of clean energy transitions, cannot be taken for granted in the DRS.
Power plants and grids provide the bulk of flexibility in power systems today and both face challenges to maintain this role in future.
For power plants, flexibility upgrades – including repurposing of some coal -fired power plants – require investments that may struggle to move forward, despite the benefits that such investment would bring for electricity security, energy transitions and CO 2 emissions reductions.
For electricity networks, the DRS raises the risk of underinvestment in upgrades, extensions and digitalisation ( see Spotlight).
Grid investment needs are set to be around a third higher over the next decade than in recent years, whi le revenues look set to fall well short of previous expectations.
If timely investment is not forthcoming, there are likely to be negative impacts on the efficiency, reliability and security of power systems.
8.3.2 Emissions In the DRS, the size of the drop in GDP and the re -imposition of stricter measures to control the spread of the Covid -19 virus together mean that CO 2 emissions in 2020 are slightly lower than in either the SDS or the STEPS.
After falling further in 2021, emissions rise again to their 2020 le vel in 2022, mainly because of higher emissions from transport, and then slowly increase to the mid -2020s, when they are over 0.6 gigatonne (Gt) higher than in 2020.
Emissions then remain around this level until well after 2030, but never get back to pre-crisis levels.
Transport is the only major sector to see emissions surpass 2019 levels over the coming decade.
Emissions from the power sector decline by more than 15% from 2019 to 2030, mainly due to declines in coal and oil -fired generation.
CO 2 emissions in the DRS are 1.7 Gt lower than in the STEPS in 2025 and 2 Gt lower in 2030 (Figure 8.16 ).
However this reduction compared with the STEPS happens for all the wrong reasons: it is driven by a lower level of economic activity and lower demand for energy services rather than any structural change in the way that energy is produced or consumed.
Based on the differences in GDP between the STEPS and the DRS, this reduction in emissions costs nearly $6 000 per tonne of CO 2.
Investments in energy efficiency and renewables are lower in the DRS, with consequences for the CO 2 intensity of the economy.
Slower rates of efficiency improvement over the next two decades in the DRS increase CO 2 emissions by almost 1 Gt relative to the STEPS by IEA.
322 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic 2040.
Electricity demand in 2030 is around 6% lower than in the STEPS, allowing existing and planned renewables to meet a larger share of demand, but investment in renewables is none theless lower in the DRS, limiting their ability to meet future demand growth.
Investment in technologies such as carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) and nuclear is also lower in the DRS.
As a result, even though energy service demands are lower in the DRS than in the STEPS, there is not a parallel drop in emissions.
For example, value added by the industry sector is 7% lower in 2030 in the DRS but emissions are down by less than 6% lower; passenger car activity in 2030 is 2.5% lower in the DRS than in the STEPS but emissions are identical.
Figure 8.16 ⊳ Change in CO 2 emissions by effect in the Delayed Recovery Scenario relative to the Stated Policies Scenario Lower economic activity reduces CO 2 emissions in the DRS relative to the STEPS, but also slows progress on efficiency in the longer term Notes: Other includes changes in emissions from fuel switching between fossil fuels, or from nuclear and CCUS.
Industrial process emissions are not included in the figure.
In 2021, emissions in the DRS are around 900 million tonnes (Mt) lower than in the SDS because the lower level of electricity demand in the DRS means that there is less coal- fired power generation.
The SDS highlights that there need not be a trade -off between economic growth and reductions in emissions.
A robust economic recovery in the SDS is associated with an increasing pace of emissions reductions, while sluggish economic growth in the DRS does not produce any marked decline post -2021.
The largest differences come in the power sector: the SDS sees a rapid phase out of coal -fired power generation, and emissions fall by more than 40% between 2019 -30, compared with a 16% decline in the DRS over this period.
There are also growing differences in emission levels between the SDS and DRS in the industry and transport sectors ( Figure 8.17 ).
-4 000-3 000-2 000-1 00001 0002 000 2021 2025 2030 2035 2040Mt CO₂Lower activity Less efficiency Renewables Other Net change relative to STEPS IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 323 8 Figure 8.17 ⊳ Energy sector and industrial process CO 2 emissions in the scenarios, 2010-2030 Emissions are broadly flat in the DRS, but they are much lower in the SDS, and the reductions achieved in the DRS come at huge social and economic cost Note: Gt CO 2 = gigatonnes of carbon dioxide; 2020e = estimate d values for 2020.
8.3.3 Inequality and energy access A protracted economic slump would widen global inequalities, as those with lower incomes would be more likely to lose employment, not least because of widespread j ob losses in the informal sector that account s for around 70% of employment in emerging market and developing economies (ILO, 2018).
In addition, many of those who might have found paid employment in other scenarios remain reliant on subsistence agriculture in the DRS.
As a result, the poorest segmen ts of the global population see a decrease in their purchasing power in the DRS that is disproportiona te to the overall downward revision in GDP.
The unequal impacts of a weaker economic outlook leads to further downgrades of the demand for modern energy from poorer households , who are more sensitive to energy bills (energy expenses represent a much higher share of total income ).
Progress on access to modern energy is a casualty of these inequalities.
Lower incomes in the DRS have a direct impact on the ability to pay for connection costs and to consume : our detailed country -by-country analysis of poverty increase and income quintiles shows that basic electricity services may become unaffordable for more than 100 million people already connected in sub- Saharan Africa and developing Asia by the end of 2020 (see Chapter 3).
This leads to households switching back to or remaining with polluting and inefficient uses for lighting and cooking , which can, counter -intuitively, push up energy demand in some cases.
This trend is exacerbated in some developing countries in the DRS by the tendency for economic hardship to prompt some migrant labourers to return from towns and cities back to rural areas, where rates of access to electricity and clean cooking are much lower than in urban areas.
20 24 28 32 36 40 2010 2020e 2030Gt CO₂CO₂ emissions STEPS DRS SDS - 8- 6- 4- 20 2 2020e 2025 2030Difference between SDS and DRS Power Industry Transport Buildings OtherGt CO2 IEA.
324 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic Table 8.1 ⊳ Population without access to electricity and clean cooking by scenario (million) Stated Policies Delayed Recovery % change 2019-2030 2019 2025 2030 2025 2030 STEPS DRS Without access to electricity World 771 710 658 795 759 -15% -2% Sub-Saharan Africa 578 574 553 628 629 -4% +9% Without access to clean cooking World 2 588 2 517 2 359 2 711 2 596 -9% +0.3 % Sub-Saharan Africa 922 1 010 1 020 1 030 1 052 +11% +14% In sub -Saharan Africa, the effects of the extended pandemic have a more negative effect on electricity access than on access to clean cooking.
This is mainly because electricity connections are more capital -intensive and are therefore more vulnerable to the downturn: it also reflects the finding that, in the STEPS, progress with clean cooking is already quite limited because there are few effective policies, so the scope for a further slowdown is low.
In addition to the lack of formal electricity connections, the DRS affects the ability of households to buy appliances such as fans, coolers and televisions, which leads in turn to reduced consumption.
Improvements in access to electricity have been reliant to a large extent on targeted policies and investment programmes, which would be at risk in the DRS of losing momentum because of the financial pressures facing governments (see Chapter 3).
Many of the countries with the greatest need to accelerate progress on access have already seen an increase in borrowing costs in the first -half of 2020 (by almost 200 basis points on average in sub -Saharan Africa).
A deeper health crisis would also push governments and donors to shift their priorities to purely emergency measures, which could further constrain the availability of finance for expanding and improving electricity supply.
8.3.4 Investment Strains on corporate and consumer balance sheets and competing fiscal priorities for governments could emerge as severe constraints on energy investment in the DRS.
Even though the total requirement for investment in the DRS is nearly 10% lower than in the STEPS to 2030, this scenario requires a steady increase in capital spending over the next decade from the low levels in 2020.
More uncertain cash flows for project developers and heightened risk aversion among lenders and investors have the potential to exacerbate current divergences in the cost and availability of finance across different sectors and markets, notably for fossil fuel- based projects and energy efficiency, and in emerging market and dev eloping economies.
Company strategies are also very likely to be reshaped by the extended crisis ( Box 8.3 ).
While the downturn so far has been marked by the resilience of low -carbon power investment and sustainable financing strategies, there are questions about how long lasting this resilience will prove to be.
All rights reserved.Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 325 8 Box 8.3 ⊳ Company investment strategies in a Delayed Recovery Scenario An extended public health crisis and economic slump could have significant implications for the way that different corporate actors in the energy sector manage risks and investment budgets.
The funds available for investment in almost all parts of the energy economy would be affected by weaker demand and lower energy prices.
An uncertain market environment could increase the pull towards assets that have a contracted or regulated cash flow, as opposed to investments with more volatile revenues based on market pricing signals.
The attraction of steadier cash flow profiles helps to underpin the continued expansion of renewable power in the DRS, although it could also potentially benefit investment in electricity networks and (to a smaller degree) gas infrastructure, at least in those cases where regulated rates of return are sufficient.
The DRS could therefore see a more rapid diversification for some publicly listed oil and gas companies away from their traditional core businesses.
For utilit ies in competitive markets, it would make it more difficult to take forward the development of conventional thermal generation, an area in which investment is already low.
Investments in consumer sectors which depend on prevailing retail energy prices – such as energy efficiency, renewables for end -use and distributed solar PV - would also suffer as a result of the lower demand trajectory.
Changing risk appetite and balance sheet constraints in the DRS could promote new financing strategies involving refinancing and capital recycling as well as mergers and acquisitions.
So far in 2020, US companies across all sectors have accelerated debt refinancing to lock in more attractive terms at a pace almost double that of 2019.
For energy assets with relatively predictable cash flows, such as offshore wind farms, the DRS could accelerate a change of ownership at the development and operational stages of projects.
Following the model pioneered by companies like Ørsted , energy companies could increasingly take on the role of pure play developers, passing on the assets in turn to institutional investors for the operating phase, and moving on to the next project; this could help to enhance returns, lower financing costs and support reinvestment of scarce development capit al (IEA, 2020a).
That said, acquisitions and refinancing of energy supply assets in 2020 are running at their slowest annualised pace in seven years, though they continue to favour renewable power and gas infrastructure in particular ( Figure 8.18 ).
The refinancing of smaller scale assets (e.g.
distributed solar PV and efficient buildings) through asset -backed securities issuance has similarly fallen to its slowest pace in four years.
Across all parts of the energy sector, such transactions continue to be most prevalent in advanced economies, where monetary conditions are accommodative and financial markets are highly developed.
Funding diversity is growin g in importance, and developers, lenders and investors may increasingly tend to favour syndicated investments and partnerships to spread risk.
Meanwhile, in sectors such as shale oil and gas where there are lots of smaller IEA.
All rights reserved.326 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic companies, efforts may shift towa rds the consolidation of businesses in the hands of fewer, better capitalised owners.
Another implication of the DRS is a preference - especially among emerging economy state -owned companies where the sovereign itself is also cash -strapped - for smaller, more modular investments over larger capital -intensive projects, and a readiness, where commercially possible, to extend the operational lifetimes of existing assets to generate cash flows.
In some cases, the latter would bring a low -carbon dividend, notably in the case of lifetime extensions of nuclear plants.
Figure 8.18 ⊳ Acquisitions and refinancing of energy supply projects Spurred by low interest rates, energy acquisitions and refinancing have grown over time, and increasi ngly suppor t the reinvestment of scarce development capital in renewables Notes: Includes disclosed transactions involving assets and projects.
Sources of finance for acquisitions and refinancing include banks, companies, governments and institutional investors.
Other includes coal mining and projects from mixed energy sectors.
Sources: IEA calculations based on IJ Global (2020).
As consumers hold on to existing appliances and equipment for longer, spending on energy efficiency improvements is 15% lower than in the STEPS, with particular weakness in the transport sector.
Fuel economy targets and zero emissions vehicle mandates continue to support EVs, whose market share is rising.
Growing income uncertainties, however, may inhibit consumers from taking advantage of low interest rates for mortgages and car loans in advanced economies, where monetary policy remains accommodative, while progress in expanding energy efficiency-related finance offerings in developing economies may stall.
Lower energy prices also undermine the economic case for commercial interventions by energy service companies and the financial health of independent players.
Overall, efficiency investments become more reliant on direct public finance and utility obligations, as well as on efforts to reduce energy consumption subsidies.
40 80 120 160 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 (Jan-Aug)Billion dollarsOther Mixed power Electricity and heat networks Thermal power Renewables Mixed oil and gas Mid/downstream oil and gas Upstream oil and gas IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 327 8 Investment in oil and gas supply rebounds in the DRS from the dramatic slump in 2020, though it remains at a lower level than in 2015 -19 and is 10% below the level required in the STEPS.
Investment at these levels is however far from guaranteed, given the increased sovereign risks and revenue shortfalls facing some producer economies and so me national oil companies ( Box 8.2) .
A delayed recovery exacerbates current cash flow shortfalls and credit constraints for US shale producers in particular, accelerating bankruptcies among smaller players and consolidating holdings in the hands of more resilient operators.
Even though borrowing costs are manageable for oil and gas majors, extra hits to revenue from lower prices and demand together with increased investor pressure force a focus on high value projects with relatively quick cash flow benefits.
Diversification efforts by the oil and gas majors continue as they grapple with long -term emissions goals as well as with pressure from investors increasingly concerned with environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues, and this is likely to remain important in the DRS.
But these efforts take on more of a two track nature, with supportive investment in more resilient businesses around utility -scale renewables, but decisions to finance low -carbon fuels and technolo gies such as CCUS facing more of an uphill struggle.
Power investment in the DRS is 9 % lower than in the STEPS.
Spending on coal -fired power is one-third lower amid overcapacity and financing concerns in emerging market and developing economies, while inv estments in new gas -fired generation become much less viable in a lower demand and price environment for wholesale markets.
Investment in renewable power is only 5% lower, though there are some potential challenges ahead.
While policies have been instrumental in reducing the cost of capital for wind and solar PV over time, risks to financing grow in emerging market and developing economies with state -owned utilities under financial strain.
Risks also grow for distributed solar PV, where consumers face balance sheet constraints.
Utilities in advanced economies face fewer difficulties in accessing financial markets than oil and gas companies, with regulated assets providing a revenue buffer.
The DRS prompts a sharp reassessment of network investment plans compared with the STEPS, and this could lead to lower levels of investment, though the need for resilience and reliability in systems with growing shares of variable renewables supports spending on digital grid infrastructure and storage.
Despite lower overall capital expenditure requirements compared to the STEPS, the mobilisation of funds for energy sector investment becomes more difficult, raising the spectre of a financing crunch in the face of still rising annual investment needs (Figure 8.19 ).
The challenges are particularly difficult for some state -owned enterprises, whose financing is often tied to the sovereign entity in emerging market and developing economies.
As spending shifts more towards the power sector, the capital structure of energy investments points to a higher share of debt.
While low interest rates offer the opportunity to finance critical infrastructure at reduced cost, increased risk aversion by banks, liquidity requirements and concerns about levels of debt may limit lending to mature sectors with bankable business models.
Increasingly scarce equity for long leadtime investments and for project development may also be subject to stricter due diligence to meet co rporate hurdle rates and a focus on cash flow preservation to meet short -term obligations.
328 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic Figure 8.19 ⊳ Global energy supply investment by sector in the Delayed Recovery Scenario and average annual change relative to the Stated Policies Scenario Despite lower spending in the DRS, especially in oil and gas and electricity networks, mobilisation of finance to meet rising capital needs from 2020 levels becomes more difficult Note: 2020e = estimated values for 2020.
In that light, the extent of the availability of additional funds from the capital markets represents a critical uncertainty about financing energy investment in a delayed recovery.
The resilience demonstrated by sustainable debt and ESG strategies so far in the downturn may offer relative value to investors in an era of even lower returns, and further policy efforts to expand sustainable finance frameworks may spark continued investor interest in clean energy, especially since some institutional investors have accrued considerable cash reserves in the current risk environment and are waiting for better opportunities to deploy them.
But there is no guarantee that energy -related asset classes will be able to attract sufficient capital to support investment relative to other sectors in the economy, particularly in fuel supply sectors, which are burdened by a mix of climate -related concerns and weak fundamentals, and in clean energy assets, which often lack the scale and liquidity to meet institutional investor criteria.
With greater risks to profitability across all sectors, and in some cases with the potential for asset write -downs (see Chapter 7), meeting the risk and return requirements of investors will depend on the thrust and clarity of policy signals from governments even more than it does now, as well as on the speed and success of measures in recovery packages to stimulate growth.
8.3.5 Innovation The pace at which technologies improve and move from the laboratory to the market, with associated reductions in cost, is an important variable that will play a big part in shaping 5001 0001 5002 000 2015-19 2020e 2021-25 2026-30Billion dollars (2019)Investment in the DRS Oil and gas Coal supply Biofuels and biogases Fossil fuel generation Nuclear Renewable power Electricity networks and storage- 200- 150- 100- 50 2021-30Annual change vs STEPS IEA.
Chapter 8 | A delayed recovery 329 8 future energy systems.
While the outcome of the innovation process is inherently uncertain and subject to a wide range of influences, there are arguably two key indicators: the funding and resources allocated to research and development (R&D); and the cumulative level of deployment of a given technology.
In the DRS, both are likely to be weaker than in the STEPS, meaning that technology development is likely to be weaker.
As a result, by the end of the 2020s, the available portfolio of clean energy technologies in the DRS is less competitive with fossil fuel alternatives than in the STEPS.
In particular, much -needed techn ologies for emissions -free shipping, aviation and heavy industry make slower progress as fewer demonstration projects enter operation to mitigate the risks for subsequent investors.
However, just as in the STEPS and the SDS, there are opportunities in the DRS for governments to invest counter- cyclically in R&D and mitigate some of the negative impacts of lower economic activity on critical technology areas.
A deeper economic crisis would be likely to increase the risks of investment in new technologies and decrease the willingness of consumers to spend on cutting edge devices.
Financial inputs to energy technology innovation include public and private budgets for research, funding for larger pilot and demonstration projects, and commercial investments in sta rt-up companies or assets with the latest designs.
Each of these types of investment carries significant risk for those putting up the money, but also offers high potential rewards if the innovation process results in a successful new technology.
The pande mic exacerbates the risks both by raising the uncertainty related to policy and market developments and by increasing the possibility that other related technologies in a given value chain will develop at a different pace and slow market uptake.
In the DRS , the capital available for investments with high risks and longer term pay -offs is further reduced by the straitened economic outlook.
An IEA survey conducted for a recent report on clean energy innovation in the Energy Technology Perspectives series (IEA, 2020b) indicates serious concern among companies about whether they will be able to keep their energy -related innovation pipelines flowing over the next couple of years, with most respondents expecting Covid -19 to have a negative impact on al l elements of their R&D, demonstration and deployment strategies.
There is a central role for governments in ensuring that setbacks do not turn into structural and long lasting damage to the pipeline of new ideas and the capacity to commercialise them.
Aft er the 2008 financial crisis and the 2014 -15 oil price collapse, private investors showed a preference for smaller, modular projects that put less capital at risk.
A similar preference in the context of a delayed economic recovery could disadvantage critic ally important large -scale projects in industry, transport and CCUS unless the public sector could accept a higher share of the risks.
Delayed demonstration of the competing options for emissions reductions in industry in particular could make it more cost ly to meet climate goals.
Delays to large -scale low -carbon hydrogen demonstration projects in the coming decade alone could potentially lead to 1.5 billion tonnes of additional CO 2 by 2040 (IEA, 2020b).
Conversely, counter -cyclical spending to support clean energy innovation could lay the foundations for new industries and technologies to emerge as the economy recovers.
330 World Energy O utlook 2020 | A longer pandemic Smaller scale and more modular technologies would be likely to be favoured in the DRS if their installation and manufacturing scale -up could be realised with small er increment s of capital investment than larger options.
If each individual investment were to require less capital because of its smaller unit size, this could provide a more incremental scale -up path and support investments in related manufacturing capacity.
In the area of electricity storage and hydrogen, technologies that might lend themselves to an approach of this kind include electrolysers, batteries and fuel cells.
For example, a capital -constrained developer in a more risk -averse invest ment environment could favour electrolysers among the lowcarbon hydrogen production technologies, despite being able to buy less capacity per dollar than would the case with options requiring more capital (Figure 8.20 ).
Governments and other large -scale investors would be more likely to want to take a wider and longer term view, but budgetary constraints in the DRS could make this difficult.
Small modular nuclear reactors are an example of a technology that could be affected both positively and negatively: they have smaller unit sizes than other nuclear projects, but also represent firstof-a-kind investments for which risks could be exacerbated.
Overall, while modular options might fare better than larger competing options, they would still de velop more slowly in the DRS than in the STEPS or the SDS, and they might well lead to higher overall systems costs, given that larger projects often benefit from greater economies of scale and lower costs per unit of output.
Figure 8.20 ⊳ Variation of low-carbon hydrogen production capacity with project capital budget and technology choice, 2020 Investors with budgets over $1 billion looking to buy hydrogen capacity get best value from fitting CCUS to existing plants; investors with smaller budgets that are risk -averse, are more likely to favour electrolysers which provide less capacity per dolla r Notes: GW H 2 = hydrogen production capacity in energy terms; gas = natural gas; CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; MWe = electricity input capacity; capex = capital expenditure.
Capacities refer to unit sizes of project, not individual modules.
Capacity adjusted to reflect differences in expected full load hours.
4 8 12 16 0 400 800 1 200 1 600 2 000TWh of hydrogen Project capex budget (Million dollars)Gas with CCUS (1 GW H₂ retrofit) Gas with CCUS (1 GW H₂ new) Gas with CCUS (300 MW H₂ new) Electrolyser (1 GWe) Electrolyser (100 MWe) Electrolyser (10 MWe) IEA.
All rights reserved.Box A.1 ⊳ World Energy Outlook links WEO homepage General information www.iea.org/weo WEO-2020 information www.iea.org/weo2020 Model ling Documentation and methodology / Investment costs www.iea.org/weo/weomodel Recent analysis Sustainable Recovery iea.li/recovery World Energy Investment 2020 iea.li/wei2020 Global Energy Review 2020 iea.li/ger2020 Outlook for biogas and biomethane: Prospects for organic growth iea.li/biogas -biomethane -outlook The Oil and Gas Industry in Energy Transitions iea.li/oil -gas-transitions Databases Sustainable Development Goal 7 www.iea.org/SDG Policy Databases iea.li/policies -database Energy subsidies: Tracking the impact of fossil -fuel subsidies www.iea.org/topics/energy- subsidies IEA.
Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 333 Annex A Tables for s cenario projections General note to the tables This annex includes historical and projected data for the Stated Policies and Sustainable Development scenarios for the following five data sets:  A.1.
Fossil fuel production and demand by region.
Power sector overview by region covering gross electricity generation and installed capacity; cumulative retirements and additions for 20 20-2040.
Global carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions and intensity from power plants are also included.
Energy demand, gross electricity generation and electrical capacity, and CO 2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion by region.
Global emissions of pollutants by energy sector and fuel.
Global average annual and cumulative energy investments by type.
Geographical coverage for Tables A.1, A.2 and A.3 include: World, North America, Central and South America, Europe, Africa, Middle East, Eurasia and Asia Pacific.
Some tables also cover: Brazil, China, European Union, India, Japan, Russia, South Africa, Southeast Asia and Unite d States.
The definitions for regions, fuels and sectors are in Annex C. Both in the text of this book and in the tables, rounding may lead to minor differences between totals and the sum of their individual components.
Growth rates are calculated on a co mpound average annual basis and are marked "n.a."
when the base year is zero or the value exceeds 200%.
Please see Box A.1 for details on where to download the World Energy Outlook (WEO) tables in Excel format.
In addition, Box A .1 lists the links relating to the main WEO website, documentation and methodology of the World Energy Model (WEM), investment costs, policy databases and recent WEO special reports.
Data sources The World Energy Model (WEM) is a very data -intensive model covering the whole global energy system.
Detailed references on databases and publications used in the modelling and analysis may be found in Annex E. The formal base year for this year's projections is 201 8, as this is the last year for which a complete picture of energy demand and production is in place.
However, we have used more recent data wherever available, and we include our 201 9 estimates for energy production and demand in this annex ( Tables A.1 to A.3).
Estimates for the year 2019 are based on u pdates of the IEA's Global Energy Review reports which are derived from a number of sources, including the latest monthly data submissions to the IEA's Energy Data Centre, other statistical releases from national administrations, and recent market data from the IEA Market Report Series that cover coal, oil, natural gas, renewables and power.
Investment estimates include the year 201 9, based on the IEA's World Energy Investment 2020 report.
334 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Historical data for gross electrical capacity (Tables A.2 and A.3) a re drawn from the S&P Global Market Intelligence World Electric Power Plants Database (March 20 20 version) and the International Atomic Energy Agency PRIS database.
Fossil fuel producti on and demand tables Oil production and demand is expressed in million barrels per day (mb/d).
Tight oil includes tight crude oil and condensate production except for the United States, which includes tight crude oil only (US tight condensate volumes are included in natural gas liquids).
Processing gains covers volume increases that occur during crude oil refining.
Biofuels and their inclusion in liquids demand is expressed in energy -equivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel.
Natural gas production and demand is expressed in billion cubic metres (bcm).
Coal production and demand is expressed in million tonnes of coal equivalent (Mtce).
Differences between historical production and demand volumes for oil, gas and coal are due to changes in stocks.
Bunkers include both international marine and aviation fue ls.
Power sector overview tables The power sector overview tables provide a high -level snapshot of the electricity system by region.
Electricity generation expressed in terawatt -hours (TWh) and installed electrical capacity data expressed in gigawatts (GW) are both provided on a gross basis (i.e.
includes own use by the generator), with more detailed data broken down by fuel and region in the A.3 tables.
Power sector carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions are expressed in million tonnes (Mt).
The emission intensity expressed in grammes of carbon dioxide per kilowatt -hour (g CO 2/kWh) is calculated based on electricity -only plants and the electricity component of combined heat and power (CHP) plants.1 For retirements and additions (both expr essed in GW) , the category "other" includes bioenergy, geothermal, concentrating solar power, marine and battery storage.
Energy demand, electricity and CO 2 emissions tables Total primary energy demand (TPED) is equivalent to power generation plus "other energy sector" excluding electricity and heat, plus total final consumption (TFC) excluding electricity and heat.
TPED does not include ambient heat from heat pumps or electricity trade.
Other renewables in TPED include geothermal, solar photovoltaic s (PV), concentrating solar power (CSP), wind and marine (tide and wave) energy for electricity and heat generation.
Sectors comprising TFC include industry, transport, buildings (residential, services and non- specified other) and other ( agriculture and non- energy use).
While not itemised separately, hydrogen is included in total final consumption and "other energy sector".
Projected gross electrical capacity is the sum of existing capacity and additions, less retirements.
While not itemis ed separately, other sources are included in total electricity generation, and battery storage in total power generation capacity.
Energy 1 We assum e that the heat component of a CHP plant is 90% efficient and the remainder of the fuel input is allocated to electricity to derive the associated electricity -only emissions.
Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 335 A demand from international marine and aviation bunkers are included only at the world transport level.
Gas use in international bunkers is not itemised separately.
Total CO 2 includes carbon dioxide emissions from "other energy sector" in addition to the power and final consumption sectors shown in the tables.
Total and power sector CO 2 emissions also account for captured emissions from bioenergy with carbon capture, utilisation and storage (BECCS).
CO 2 emissions do not include emissions from industrial waste and non-r enewable municipal waste.
Process CO 2 emissions from industrial production and fuel transformation are inclu ded only at the world level.
Abbreviations used: Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent; CAAGR = compound average annual growth rate ; Petrochem.
feedstock = petrochemical feedstock .
Emissions of air pollutant tables These tables include projections for primary air pollutant s that are emitted directly as a result of human activity.
The focus is on anthropogenic emissions of sul fur dioxide (SO 2), nitrogen oxides (NO X) and fine particulate matter (PM 2.5).
Only emissions related to en ergy activities are reported.
The base year of the projections is 2019 .
Base year air pollutant emissions estimates and scenario projections stem from a coupling of sectoral activity and associated energy demand of the WEM with the Greenhouse Gas and Air Pollution Interactions and Synergies (GAINS) model of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA).
2 Emissions of all air pollutants (SO 2, NO X, PM 2.5) are expressed in million tonnes (Mt) per year and are reported by sector.
The energy sector is broken down into power, industry including other transformation (i.e.
"other energy sector " excluding electricity and heat), transport, buildings and agriculture.
Emissions are reported separately for all energy activities and for combustion acti vities; the difference between these two relates to energy processes, including, for example, cement production in the industry sector or abrasion, tyres and brakes in road transport.
Energy investment overview tables The energy in vestment overview tables provide a high -level snapshot for the world by type of investment expressed in billion dollars, including key regional details.
Total fuel investment covers oil, natural gas, co al, biofuels and biogases.
Total power investment cove rs power plants, electricity networks and also battery storage which is not itemised separately in the power table.
Electricity networks includes electric vehicle (EV) fast chargers.
Energy efficiency includes investments in buildings, transport and indust ry.
Renewables for end -use include solar thermal, bioenergy and geothermal applications for heating .
Other end -use includes carbon capture, utilisation and storage ( CCUS ) in industry sector, EVs and EV slow chargers.
2 See: www.iiasa.ac.at/web/home/research/researchPrograms/air/GAINS.html for details.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 336Table A.1: Fossil fuel production 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Oil production and supply (mb/d) North America 14.2 23.0 24.7 27.7 28.9 27.3 26 29 27 1.4 0.5 Central and South America 7.4 6.6 6.3 7.3 7.9 9.3 7 8 9 2.0 1.8 Europe 4.4 3.7 3.5 3.8 3.0 2.1 4 3 2 -1.5 -2.5 European Union 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 1 0 0 -2.8 -2.6 Africa 10.2 8.3 8.4 6.9 7.2 7.3 9 7 7 -1.4 -0.7 Middle East 25.4 31.7 30.2 31.1 33.4 36.4 32 33 36 0.9 0.9 Eurasia 13.4 14.5 14.5 13.9 13.9 13.2 15 14 13 -0.4 -0.5 Asia Pacific 8.4 7.7 7.7 6.7 6.4 5.8 8 6 6 -1.7 -1.4 Non-OPEC 50.1 58.7 60.5 63.1 64.1 61.8 63 64 61 0.5 0.1 OPEC 33.3 36.9 34.9 34.4 36.5 39.5 37 36 39 0.4 0.6 World production 83.4 95.5 95.4 97.5 100.6 101.3 100 100 100 0.5 0.3 Conventional crude oil 66.9 66.8 65.0 63.8 63.8 61.6 66 62 59 -0.2 -0.3 Tight oil 0.7 6.3 7.7 10.0 11.6 12.1 8 11 12 3.8 2.2 Natural gas liquids 12.7 17.6 18.2 18.8 20.0 21.8 19 19 21 0.8 0.8 Extra-heavy oil and bitumen 2.5 3.9 3.7 3.9 4.0 4.4 4 4 4 0.9 0.9 Other 0.6 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1 1 1 3.1 2.5 Processing gains 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.6 2.8 2 3 3 0.9 0.9 World supply 85.5 97.8 97.8 99.9 103.2 104.1 100 100 100 0.5 0.3 Natural gas production (bcm) North America 811 1 080 1 159 1 284 1 300 1 315 28 28 25 1.1 0.6 Central and South America 160 175 174 162 184 244 4 4 5 0.5 1.6 Europe 341 276 260 228 208 185 6 5 4 -2.0 -1.6 European Union 148 79 71 36 29 25 2 1 0 -7.7 -4.8 Africa 203 249 250 277 336 457 6 7 9 2.8 2.9 Middle East 463 638 653 723 792 1 020 16 17 20 1.8 2.1 Eurasia 814 942 959 994 1 038 1 143 23 23 22 0.7 0.8 Asia Pacific 489 597 636 690 754 856 16 16 16 1.6 1.4 World 3 281 3 957 4 089 4 358 4 613 5 221 100 100 100 1.1 1.2 Conventional gas 2 784 2 969 2 998 3 045 3 162 3 561 73 69 68 0.5 0.8 Tight gas 265 291 285 339 277 252 7 6 5 -0.2 -0.6 Shale gas 156 613 719 874 1 063 1 261 18 23 24 3.6 2.7 Coalbed methane 77 81 82 80 83 116 2 2 2 0.2 1.7 Other - 3 5 20 27 31 0 1 1 16.4 9.0 Coal production (Mtce) North America 820 581 547 331 253 178 10 5 4 -6.8 -5.2 Central and South America 75 83 81 65 59 40 1 1 1 -2.8 -3.3 Europe 331 244 219 135 96 57 4 2 1 -7.2 -6.2 European Union 220 178 152 89 53 23 3 1 0 -9.1 -8.6 Africa 210 225 217 206 189 190 4 4 4 -1.2 -0.6 Middle East 1 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 -0.4 0.0 Eurasia 309 418 411 374 382 392 7 8 8 -0.7 -0.2 Asia Pacific 3 487 4 009 4 148 3 999 4 023 3 877 74 80 82 -0.3 -0.3 World 5 233 5 562 5 625 5 112 5 004 4 735 100 100 100 -1.1 -0.8 Steam coal 4 067 4 371 4 428 4 083 4 044 3 874 79 81 82 -0.8 -0.6 Coking coal 866 909 936 811 764 704 17 15 15 -1.8 -1.3 Lignite and peat 300 283 261 218 196 157 5 4 3 -2.6 -2.4 Fossil fuel production Shares (%) Stated Policies Scenario CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 337Table A.1: Fossil fuel production A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Oil production and supply (mb/d) North America 14.2 23.0 24.7 25.8 24.1 19.9 26 29 31 -0.2 -1.0 Central and South America 7.4 6.6 6.3 6.8 6.2 4.5 7 7 7 -0.1 -1.6 Europe 4.4 3.7 3.5 3.5 2.7 1.4 4 3 2 -2.4 -4.3 European Union 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.1 1 0 0 -4.4 -6.1 Africa 10.2 8.3 8.4 6.4 5.8 4.2 9 7 6 -3.4 -3.3 Middle East 25.4 31.7 30.2 28.9 28.8 22.9 32 34 35 -0.4 -1.3 Eurasia 13.4 14.5 14.5 13.0 11.6 8.0 15 14 12 -2.0 -2.8 Asia Pacific 8.4 7.7 7.7 5.9 5.1 3.5 8 6 5 -3.7 -3.7 Non-OPEC 50.1 58.7 60.5 58.2 52.9 40.0 63 63 62 -1.2 -2.0 OPEC 33.3 36.9 34.9 32.1 31.5 24.4 37 37 38 -0.9 -1.7 World production 83.4 95.5 95.4 90.2 84.3 64.4 100 100 100 -1.1 -1.9 Conventional crude oil 66.9 66.8 65.0 59.6 54.3 37.1 66 63 56 -1.6 -2.6 Tight oil 0.7 6.3 7.7 9.3 9.4 8.8 8 11 13 1.8 0.6 Natural gas liquids 12.7 17.6 18.2 16.8 16.4 14.9 19 19 23 -1.0 -1.0 Extra-heavy oil and bitumen 2.5 3.9 3.7 3.6 3.3 2.6 4 4 4 -1.1 -1.6 Other 0.6 0.8 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.9 1 1 1 1.4 0.5 Processing gains 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 1.8 2 3 3 -0.7 -1.3 World supply 85.5 97.8 97.8 92.5 86.5 66.2 100 100 100 -1.1 -1.8 Natural gas production (bcm) North America 811 1 080 1 159 1 245 1 034 729 28 26 21 -1.0 -2.2 Central and South America 160 175 174 142 150 134 4 4 4 -1.3 -1.2 Europe 341 276 260 225 192 139 6 5 4 -2.7 -2.9 European Union 148 79 71 36 34 23 2 1 1 -6.4 -5.3 Africa 203 249 250 267 309 298 6 8 8 2.0 0.8 Middle East 463 638 653 645 647 673 16 16 19 -0.1 0.1 Eurasia 814 942 959 976 950 848 23 24 24 -0.1 -0.6 Asia Pacific 489 597 636 666 717 733 16 18 21 1.1 0.7 World 3 281 3 957 4 089 4 166 3 998 3 554 100 100 100 -0.2 -0.7 Conventional gas 2 784 2 969 2 998 2 943 2 902 2 661 73 73 75 -0.3 -0.6 Tight gas 265 291 285 339 289 164 7 7 5 0.1 -2.6 Shale gas 156 613 719 801 717 633 18 18 18 -0.0 -0.6 Coalbed methane 77 81 82 68 73 78 2 2 2 -1.0 -0.2 Other - 3 5 16 17 18 0 0 0 11.4 6.1 Coal production (Mtce) North America 820 581 547 155 102 65 10 3 4 -14.1 -9.6 Central and South America 75 83 81 47 46 9 1 1 0 -5.1 -9.9 Europe 331 244 219 93 54 24 4 2 1 -12.0 -9.9 European Union 220 178 152 60 30 14 3 1 1 -13.6 -10.8 Africa 210 225 217 185 148 111 4 5 6 -3.4 -3.1 Middle East 1 2 2 2 2 1 0 0 0 -0.3 -1.9 Eurasia 309 418 411 312 255 135 7 8 7 -4.2 -5.2 Asia Pacific 3 487 4 009 4 148 3 405 2 598 1 503 74 81 81 -4.2 -4.7 World 5 233 5 562 5 625 4 199 3 204 1 850 100 100 100 -5.0 -5.2 Steam coal 4 067 4 371 4 428 3 305 2 489 1 354 79 78 73 -5.1 -5.5 Coking coal 866 909 936 746 622 438 17 19 24 -3.6 -3.5 Lignite and peat 300 283 261 148 93 58 5 3 3 -8.9 -6.9 Fossil fuel production Sustainable Development Scenario Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 338Table A.1: Fossil fuel demand 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Oil and liquids demand (mb/d) North America 22.2 22.8 22.9 22.1 21.7 19.3 23 21 19 -0.5 -0.8 United States 17.8 18.5 18.5 17.9 17.5 15.2 19 17 15 -0.5 -0.9 Central and South America 5.5 5.5 5.4 5.6 5.7 6.2 6 6 6 0.5 0.6 Europe 14.3 13.4 13.3 11.9 10.9 8.6 14 11 8 -1.8 -2.0 European Union 11.0 10.1 10.0 8.6 7.6 5.6 10 7 5 -2.4 -2.7 Africa 3.3 4.1 4.1 4.7 5.4 7.0 4 5 7 2.6 2.6 Middle East 6.6 7.4 7.5 7.9 8.5 10.0 8 8 10 1.2 1.4 Eurasia 3.2 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.2 4 4 4 0.7 0.5 Asia Pacific 25.3 31.9 32.5 35.0 37.1 37.9 33 36 36 1.2 0.7 China 8.8 12.6 13.2 14.4 15.1 14.1 14 15 13 1.2 0.3 India 3.3 4.8 5.0 6.1 7.1 8.7 5 7 8 3.3 2.7 International bunkers 7.0 8.4 8.4 8.8 9.7 10.9 9 9 10 1.3 1.3 World oil 87.4 97.3 97.9 99.9 103.2 104.1 100 100 100 0.5 0.3 Road, aviation & shipping 46.5 54.6 54.9 56.2 58.6 58.8 56 57 56 0.6 0.3 Industry & petrochemicals 16.6 18.3 18.5 20.1 21.3 23.0 19 21 22 1.3 1.0 World biofuels 1.2 1.9 2.1 2.8 3.6 5.1 2 3 5 5.2 4.4 World liquids 88.6 99.2 100.0 102.8 106.8 109.2 100 100 100 0.6 0.4 Natural gas demand (bcm) North America 835 1 060 1 090 1 150 1 157 1 163 27 25 22 0.5 0.3 United States 678 855 881 922 920 901 22 20 17 0.4 0.1 Central and South America 147 166 159 159 175 233 4 4 4 0.8 1.8 Europe 695 606 604 598 570 536 15 12 10 -0.5 -0.6 European Union 446 399 406 397 373 329 10 8 6 -0.8 -1.0 Africa 106 161 169 180 201 285 4 4 5 1.6 2.5 Middle East 391 543 559 598 663 780 14 14 15 1.6 1.6 Eurasia 579 616 609 621 633 664 15 14 13 0.4 0.4 Asia Pacific 586 804 837 1 046 1 198 1 521 21 26 29 3.3 2.9 China 111 281 307 425 500 637 8 11 12 4.5 3.5 India 64 61 63 100 131 201 2 3 4 6.8 5.6 International bunkers - 0 0 8 17 39 0 0 1 n.a.
World 3 340 3 955 4 026 4 358 4 613 5 221 100 100 100 1.2 1.2 Power 1 352 1 568 1 602 1 652 1 695 1 863 40 37 36 0.5 0.7 Industrial use 605 776 796 918 1 020 1 240 20 22 24 2.3 2.1 Coal demand (Mtce) North America 770 497 431 266 204 125 8 4 3 -6.6 -5.7 United States 718 458 393 247 188 113 7 4 2 -6.5 -5.8 Central and South America 35 43 43 38 38 42 1 1 1 -1.1 -0.1 Europe 538 450 387 250 202 163 7 4 3 -5.7 -4.0 European Union 360 309 251 155 106 60 5 2 1 -7.5 -6.6 Africa 155 142 167 165 164 161 3 3 3 -0.1 -0.2 Middle East 3 5 5 8 9 12 0 0 0 5.0 3.8 Eurasia 197 231 225 208 206 198 4 4 4 -0.8 -0.6 Asia Pacific 3 512 4 092 4 135 4 176 4 182 4 034 77 84 85 0.1 -0.1 China 2 567 2 837 2 864 2 877 2 779 2 524 53 56 53 -0.3 -0.6 India 399 592 590 631 712 772 11 14 16 1.7 1.3 World 5 211 5 460 5 392 5 112 5 004 4 735 100 100 100 -0.7 -0.6 Power 3 099 3 509 3 449 3 218 3 148 2 974 64 63 63 -0.8 -0.7 Industrial use 1 239 1 138 1 151 1 135 1 128 1 107 21 23 23 -0.2 -0.2 Fossil fuel demand Shares (%) Stated Policies Scenario CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 339Table A.1: Fossil fuel demand A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Oil and liquids demand (mb/d) North America 22.2 22.8 22.9 19.9 17.4 11.1 23 20 17 -2.5 -3.4 United States 17.8 18.5 18.5 15.9 13.8 8.5 19 16 13 -2.6 -3.6 Central and South America 5.5 5.5 5.4 5.1 4.6 3.7 6 5 6 -1.5 -1.8 Europe 14.3 13.4 13.3 11.1 9.0 4.7 14 10 7 -3.5 -4.9 European Union 11.0 10.1 10.0 8.0 6.3 3.0 10 7 5 -4.0 -5.6 Africa 3.3 4.1 4.1 4.6 5.0 5.5 4 6 8 2.0 1.4 Middle East 6.6 7.4 7.5 7.2 7.0 7.2 8 8 11 -0.5 -0.2 Eurasia 3.2 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.7 3.2 4 4 5 -0.3 -0.9 Asia Pacific 25.3 31.9 32.5 33.2 32.2 24.8 33 37 37 -0.1 -1.3 China 8.8 12.6 13.2 13.7 12.9 8.9 14 15 13 -0.3 -1.9 India 3.3 4.8 5.0 5.8 6.2 5.8 5 7 9 2.1 0.7 International bunkers 7.0 8.4 8.4 7.8 7.4 6.0 9 9 9 -1.1 -1.6 World oil 87.4 97.3 97.9 92.5 86.5 66.2 100 100 100 -1.1 -1.8 Road, aviation & shipping 46.5 54.6 54.9 51.9 47.6 31.8 56 55 48 -1.3 -2.6 Industry & petrochemicals 16.6 18.3 18.5 18.9 19.0 19.1 19 22 29 0.2 0.2 World biofuels 1.2 1.9 2.1 4.4 6.2 7.4 2 7 10 10.5 6.3 World liquids 88.6 99.2 100.0 96.9 92.7 73.6 100 100 100 -0.7 -1.4 Natural gas demand (bcm) North America 835 1 060 1 090 1 096 907 623 27 23 18 -1.7 -2.6 United States 678 855 881 897 730 484 22 18 14 -1.7 -2.8 Central and South America 147 166 159 146 145 129 4 4 4 -0.9 -1.0 Europe 695 606 604 572 476 332 15 12 9 -2.1 -2.8 European Union 446 399 406 384 310 202 10 8 6 -2.4 -3.3 Africa 106 161 169 182 185 175 4 5 5 0.8 0.2 Middle East 391 543 559 526 533 502 14 13 14 -0.4 -0.5 Eurasia 579 616 609 623 594 503 15 15 14 -0.2 -0.9 Asia Pacific 586 804 837 1 017 1 150 1 279 21 29 36 2.9 2.0 China 111 281 307 398 446 511 8 11 14 3.4 2.5 India 64 61 63 100 144 210 2 4 6 7.7 5.9 International bunkers - 0 0 5 9 13 0 0 0 n.a.
World 3 340 3 955 4 026 4 166 3 998 3 554 100 100 100 -0.1 -0.6 Power 1 352 1 568 1 602 1 641 1 478 1 060 40 37 30 -0.7 -1.9 Industrial use 605 776 796 860 874 874 20 22 25 0.9 0.4 Coal demand (Mtce) North America 770 497 431 101 59 42 8 2 2 -16.5 -10.5 United States 718 458 393 84 48 32 7 2 2 -17.3 -11.3 Central and South America 35 43 43 28 22 18 1 1 1 -6.1 -4.0 Europe 538 450 387 180 116 73 7 4 4 -10.3 -7.6 European Union 360 309 251 104 60 39 5 2 2 -12.1 -8.5 Africa 155 142 167 137 115 80 3 4 4 -3.3 -3.5 Middle East 3 5 5 7 6 5 0 0 0 1.3 -0.5 Eurasia 197 231 225 165 124 68 4 4 4 -5.3 -5.5 Asia Pacific 3 512 4 092 4 135 3 581 2 762 1 564 77 86 85 -3.6 -4.5 China 2 567 2 837 2 864 2 539 1 952 1 045 53 61 57 -3.4 -4.7 India 399 592 590 516 454 298 11 14 16 -2.4 -3.2 World 5 211 5 460 5 392 4 199 3 204 1 850 100 100 100 -4.6 -5.0 Power 3 099 3 509 3 449 2 448 1 686 706 64 53 38 -6.3 -7.3 Industrial use 1 239 1 138 1 151 1 035 903 697 21 28 38 -2.2 -2.4 Fossil fuel demand Sustainable Development Scenario Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 340Table A.2: Power sector overview 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Electricity generation (TWh) North America 5 424 5 388 5 496 5 639 6 057 20 17 15 0.4 0.6 Central and South America 1 302 1 333 1 477 1 669 2 174 5 5 5 2.1 2.4 Europe 4 136 4 028 4 115 4 289 4 783 15 13 12 0.6 0.8 Africa 837 853 972 1 196 1 773 3 4 4 3.1 3.5 Middle East 1 159 1 162 1 277 1 481 1 989 4 5 5 2.2 2.6 Eurasia 1 387 1 410 1 479 1 561 1 759 5 5 4 0.9 1.1 Asia Pacific 12 374 12 767 14 863 16 983 21 560 47 52 54 2.6 2.5 China 7 185 7 518 8 891 9 952 12 023 28 30 30 2.6 2.3 India 1 583 1 583 1 896 2 461 3 887 6 7 10 4.1 4.4 World 26 619 26 942 29 679 32 818 40 094 100 100 100 1.8 1.9 Electrical capacity (GW) North America 1 435 1 452 1 510 1 651 2 003 19 16 15 1.2 1.5 Central and South America 362 376 434 490 633 5 5 5 2.4 2.5 Europe 1 300 1 332 1 483 1 624 1 876 18 16 14 1.8 1.6 Africa 246 255 295 373 602 3 4 4 3.5 4.2 Middle East 330 343 411 469 614 5 5 5 2.9 2.8 Eurasia 333 340 359 373 414 5 4 3 0.9 1.0 Asia Pacific 3 223 3 386 4 340 5 214 7 275 45 51 54 4.0 3.7 China 1 887 1 991 2 577 3 062 3 945 27 30 29 4.0 3.3 India 393 414 573 792 1 552 6 8 12 6.1 6.5 World 7 228 7 484 8 832 10 195 13 418 100 100 100 2.8 2.8 Global power sector CO 2 emissions and CO 2 intensity from electricity generation CO 2 emissions (Mt) 13 823 13 699 13 011 12 782 12 477 n.a.
-0.6 -0.4 Intensity (g CO 2/kWh) 475 463 398 352 282 n.a.
-2.5 -2.3 Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario Coal Gas Oil Nuclear Hydro Wind S olar PV Other Total Cumulative retirements, 2020-2040 (GW) North America 227 137 68 39 31 92 40 46 681 Central and South America 7 13 18 0 8 13 3 9 72 Europe 183 55 42 75 39 157 104 50 704 Africa 40 17 21 2 3 4 2 3 92 Middle East 0 41 41 - 0 0 1 1 85 Eurasia 54 101 8 20 1 0 0 4 189 Asia Pacific 173 78 70 32 39 180 147 90 808 China 81 1 4 - 21 140 80 30 357 India 35 6 3 2 3 28 12 35 123 World 683 442 269 168 121 446 298 203 2 631 Cumulative additions, 2020-2040 (GW) North America 18 305 15 8 46 233 453 155 1 232 Central and South America 3 74 2 7 64 65 88 25 329 Europe 42 131 3 42 64 410 379 178 1 248 Africa 30 89 15 6 43 57 149 50 438 Middle East 5 162 19 12 6 32 98 22 357 Eurasia 33 137 0 26 18 28 6 17 264 Asia Pacific 347 329 15 133 345 913 2 176 440 4 697 China 140 93 1 87 173 571 1 094 153 2 310 India 59 23 1 27 54 207 698 191 1 261 World 478 1 226 69 233 585 1 738 3 350 887 8 566 Stated Policies Scenario IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 341Table A.2: Power sector overview ACoal Gas Oil Nuclear Hydro Wind S olar PV Other Total Cumulative retirements, 2020-2040 (GW) North America 238 121 68 21 31 92 40 81 692 Central and South America 9 14 18 0 8 13 3 11 77 Europe 206 155 41 65 39 157 104 74 841 Africa 39 46 28 1 3 4 2 4 126 Middle East 0 41 39 - 0 0 1 0 82 Eurasia 63 102 8 20 1 0 0 4 200 Asia Pacific 658 80 73 14 39 177 147 120 1 307 China 393 1 4 - 21 137 80 56 693 India 125 6 3 2 3 28 12 40 219 World 1 213 558 274 122 121 443 298 294 3 324 Cumulative additions, 2020-2040 (GW) North America 5 117 1 18 53 394 818 360 1 765 Central and South America 1 31 3 8 75 85 151 44 398 Europe 12 172 1 51 77 608 582 293 1 795 Africa 10 74 27 11 74 88 337 100 721 Middle East 3 81 15 17 11 144 201 91 563 Eurasia 2 82 0 32 48 46 18 42 271 Asia Pacific 110 338 17 169 504 1 514 3 478 746 6 877 China 35 80 0 113 227 856 1 998 320 3 629 India 34 111 1 31 71 325 780 287 1 640 World 143 893 64 306 843 2 879 5 586 1 676 12 390 Sustainable Development Scenario2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Electricity generation (TWh) North America 5 424 5 388 5 200 5 233 5 765 20 17 15 -0.3 0.3 Central and South America 1 302 1 333 1 422 1 577 2 039 5 5 5 1.5 2.0 Europe 4 136 4 028 4 172 4 502 5 635 15 14 15 1.0 1.6 Africa 837 853 1 023 1 301 1 930 3 4 5 3.9 4.0 Middle East 1 159 1 162 1 185 1 388 2 018 4 4 5 1.6 2.7 Eurasia 1 387 1 410 1 435 1 451 1 500 5 5 4 0.3 0.3 Asia Pacific 12 374 12 767 14 437 16 014 19 886 47 51 51 2.1 2.1 China 7 185 7 518 8 607 9 317 10 951 28 30 28 2.0 1.8 India 1 583 1 583 1 869 2 365 3 601 6 8 9 3.7 4.0 World 26 619 26 942 28 874 31 465 38 774 100 100 100 1.4 1.7 Electrical capacity (GW) North America 1 435 1 452 1 587 1 823 2 526 19 16 15 2.1 2.7 Central and South America 362 376 452 524 697 5 4 4 3.1 3.0 Europe 1 300 1 332 1 550 1 819 2 286 18 16 14 2.9 2.6 Africa 246 255 335 477 850 3 4 5 5.9 5.9 Middle East 330 343 439 529 824 5 5 5 4.0 4.3 Eurasia 333 340 353 366 411 5 3 2 0.7 0.9 Asia Pacific 3 223 3 386 4 743 6 113 8 956 45 52 54 5.5 4.7 China 1 887 1 991 2 784 3 549 4 927 27 30 30 5.4 4.4 India 393 414 685 997 1 835 6 9 11 8.3 7.3 World 7 228 7 484 9 459 11 650 16 550 100 100 100 4.1 3.9 Global power sector CO 2 emissions and CO 2 intensity from electricity generation CO 2 emissions (Mt) 13 823 13 699 10 656 7 786 3 185 n.a.
-5.0 -6.7 Intensity (g CO 2/kWh) 475 463 333 220 67 n.a.
-6.6 -8.8 Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 342Table A.3: Energy demand – World 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 12 852 14 300 14 406 14 966 15 755 17 085 100 100 100 0.8 0.8 Coal 3 650 3 839 3 775 3 578 3 503 3 314 26 22 19 -0.7 -0.6 Oil 4 117 4 496 4 525 4 615 4 774 4 832 31 30 28 0.5 0.3 Natural gas 2 755 3 284 3 340 3 610 3 816 4 321 23 24 25 1.2 1.2 Nuclear 719 707 727 733 803 896 5 5 5 0.9 1.0 Hydro 296 362 370 400 438 509 3 3 3 1.5 1.5 Bioenergy 1 205 1 327 1 354 1 498 1 630 1 816 9 10 11 1.7 1.4 Other renewables 110 286 314 532 792 1 396 2 5 8 8.8 7.4 Power sector 4 775 5 486 5 532 5 665 6 009 6 815 100 100 100 0.8 1.0 Coal 2 171 2 459 2 414 2 253 2 203 2 082 44 37 31 -0.8 -0.7 Oil 265 203 203 169 141 118 4 2 2 -3.3 -2.6 Natural gas 1 114 1 304 1 332 1 375 1 410 1 549 24 23 23 0.5 0.7 Nuclear 719 707 727 733 803 896 13 13 13 0.9 1.0 Hydro 296 362 370 400 438 509 7 7 7 1.5 1.5 Bioenergy 121 213 221 278 322 420 4 5 6 3.5 3.1 Other renewables 89 237 263 458 692 1 240 5 12 18 9.2 7.7 Other energy sector 1 420 1 504 1 512 1 603 1 678 1 774 100 100 100 0.9 0.8 Electricity 312 370 375 389 413 481 25 25 27 0.9 1.2 Total final consumption 8 848 9 959 10 050 10 622 11 268 12 321 100 100 100 1.0 1.0 Coal 1 059 995 985 948 927 881 10 8 7 -0.5 -0.5 Oil 3 586 4 050 4 076 4 214 4 385 4 460 41 39 36 0.7 0.4 Natural gas 1 364 1 631 1 658 1 809 1 947 2 253 17 17 18 1.5 1.5 Electricity 1 540 1 921 1 945 2 163 2 408 2 966 19 21 24 2.0 2.0 Heat 275 301 307 316 323 327 3 3 3 0.5 0.3 Bioenergy 1 002 1 013 1 028 1 097 1 175 1 269 10 10 10 1.2 1.0 Other renewables 21 48 51 74 100 156 1 1 1 6.3 5.5 Industry 2 650 2 874 2 927 3 130 3 321 3 706 100 100 100 1.2 1.1 Coal 867 797 805 794 790 775 28 24 21 -0.2 -0.2 Oil 333 280 282 277 279 280 10 8 8 -0.1 -0.0 Natural gas 500 645 661 764 849 1 034 23 26 28 2.3 2.2 Electricity 641 805 822 911 985 1 145 28 30 31 1.7 1.6 Heat 125 142 146 149 152 150 5 5 4 0.4 0.1 Bioenergy 185 204 210 233 261 310 7 8 8 2.0 1.9 Other renewables 0 1 1 2 5 13 0 0 0 14.1 12.2 Transport 2 430 2 894 2 920 3 062 3 268 3 510 100 100 100 1.0 0.9 Oil 2 259 2 653 2 668 2 728 2 840 2 854 91 87 81 0.6 0.3 International bunkers 358 422 423 445 489 547 15 15 16 1.3 1.2 Electricity 25 34 34 56 86 175 1 3 5 8.8 8.1 Bioenergy 57 91 98 139 186 269 3 6 8 6.0 4.9 Other fuels 89 117 120 139 156 212 4 5 6 2.4 2.7 Buildings 2 826 3 080 3 084 3 175 3 316 3 607 100 100 100 0.7 0.7 Coal 137 126 110 80 60 26 4 2 1 -5.3 -6.6 Oil 317 320 324 299 282 256 10 9 7 -1.2 -1.1 Natural gas 626 715 722 743 767 819 23 23 23 0.6 0.6 Electricity 828 1 012 1 017 1 117 1 249 1 548 33 38 43 1.9 2.0 Heat 147 155 157 163 167 173 5 5 5 0.6 0.5 Bioenergy 751 706 707 706 700 649 23 21 18 -0.1 -0.4 Traditional biomass 634 590 588 573 544 445 19 16 12 -0.7 -1.3 Other renewables 20 45 47 68 90 136 2 3 4 6.1 5.2 Other 942 1 111 1 119 1 255 1 361 1 497 100 100 100 1.8 1.4 Petrochem.
Feedstock 572 585 596 681 746 848 53 55 57 2.1 1.7 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 343Table A.3: Energy demand – World A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 12 852 14 300 14 406 13 853 13 378 13 020 100 100 100 -0.7 -0.5 Coal 3 650 3 839 3 775 2 939 2 243 1 295 26 17 10 -4.6 -5.0 Oil 4 117 4 496 4 525 4 253 3 963 3 006 31 30 23 -1.2 -1.9 Natural gas 2 755 3 284 3 340 3 450 3 312 2 943 23 25 23 -0.1 -0.6 Nuclear 719 707 727 764 895 1 126 5 7 9 1.9 2.1 Hydro 296 362 370 416 475 575 3 4 4 2.3 2.1 Bioenergy 1 205 1 327 1 354 1 341 1 283 1 682 9 10 13 -0.5 1.0 Other renewables 110 286 314 691 1 207 2 393 2 9 18 13.0 10.1 Power sector 4 775 5 486 5 532 5 293 5 326 5 907 100 100 100 -0.3 0.3 Coal 2 171 2 459 2 414 1 713 1 180 494 44 22 8 -6.3 -7.3 Oil 265 203 203 134 92 59 4 2 1 -7.0 -5.7 Natural gas 1 114 1 304 1 332 1 367 1 233 884 24 23 15 -0.7 -1.9 Nuclear 719 707 727 764 895 1 126 13 17 19 1.9 2.1 Hydro 296 362 370 416 475 575 7 9 10 2.3 2.1 Bioenergy 121 213 221 310 400 641 4 8 11 5.5 5.2 Other renewables 89 237 263 590 1 052 2 128 5 20 36 13.4 10.5 Other energy sector 1 420 1 504 1 512 1 461 1 404 1 394 100 100 100 -0.7 -0.4 Electricity 312 370 375 376 386 481 25 27 35 0.3 1.2 Total final consumption 8 848 9 959 10 050 9 929 9 675 9 324 100 100 100 -0.3 -0.4 Coal 1 059 995 985 868 748 553 10 8 6 -2.5 -2.7 Oil 3 586 4 050 4 076 3 908 3 672 2 799 41 38 30 -0.9 -1.8 Natural gas 1 364 1 631 1 658 1 663 1 621 1 442 17 17 15 -0.2 -0.7 Electricity 1 540 1 921 1 945 2 108 2 321 2 855 19 24 31 1.6 1.8 Heat 275 301 307 295 275 236 3 3 3 -1.0 -1.3 Bioenergy 1 002 1 013 1 028 972 845 999 10 9 11 -1.8 -0.1 Other renewables 21 48 51 101 155 264 1 2 3 10.6 8.2 Industry 2 650 2 874 2 927 2 933 2 875 2 856 100 100 100 -0.2 -0.1 Coal 867 797 805 724 632 488 28 22 17 -2.2 -2.4 Oil 333 280 282 245 209 163 10 7 6 -2.7 -2.6 Natural gas 500 645 661 715 727 729 23 25 26 0.9 0.5 Electricity 641 805 822 882 935 1 075 28 33 38 1.2 1.3 Heat 125 142 146 134 116 86 5 4 3 -2.1 -2.5 Bioenergy 185 204 210 223 235 265 7 8 9 1.0 1.1 Other renewables 0 1 1 8 18 43 0 1 1 28.6 18.8 Transport 2 430 2 894 2 920 2 927 2 887 2 506 100 100 100 -0.1 -0.7 Oil 2 259 2 653 2 668 2 517 2 310 1 558 91 80 62 -1.3 -2.5 International bunkers 358 422 423 394 376 303 15 13 12 -1.1 -1.6 Electricity 25 34 34 63 122 322 1 4 13 12.3 11.3 Bioenergy 57 91 98 225 324 409 3 11 16 11.5 7.0 Other fuels 89 117 120 122 132 218 4 5 9 0.9 2.9 Buildings 2 826 3 080 3 084 2 876 2 649 2 649 100 100 100 -1.4 -0.7 Coal 137 126 110 75 49 6 4 2 0 -7.0 -13.0 Oil 317 320 324 292 263 171 10 10 6 -1.9 -3.0 Natural gas 626 715 722 678 618 440 23 23 17 -1.4 -2.3 Electricity 828 1 012 1 017 1 085 1 177 1 368 33 44 52 1.3 1.4 Heat 147 155 157 157 155 147 5 6 6 -0.1 -0.3 Bioenergy 751 706 707 499 251 272 23 9 10 -9.0 -4.4 Traditional biomass 634 590 588 317 - - 19 - - n.a.
Other renewables 20 45 47 88 129 211 2 5 8 9.7 7.4 Other 942 1 111 1 119 1 194 1 264 1 313 100 100 100 1.1 0.8 Petrochem.
Feedstock 572 585 596 661 718 790 53 57 60 1.7 1.4 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 344Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – World 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 21 524 26 619 26 942 29 679 32 818 40 094 100 100 100 1.8 1.9 Coal 8 662 10 160 9 849 9 418 9 294 8 984 37 28 22 -0.5 -0.4 Oil 970 786 785 663 560 463 3 2 1 -3.0 -2.5 Natural gas 4 842 6 150 6 317 6 947 7 331 8 387 23 22 21 1.4 1.4 Nuclear 2 756 2 710 2 789 2 813 3 081 3 439 10 9 9 0.9 1.0 Renewables 4 260 6 778 7 167 9 809 12 522 18 791 27 38 47 5.2 4.7 Hydro 3 448 4 214 4 305 4 656 5 089 5 919 16 16 15 1.5 1.5 Bioenergy 367 635 667 895 1 055 1 410 2 3 4 4.3 3.6 Wind 342 1 273 1 423 2 394 3 361 5 441 5 10 14 8.1 6.6 Geothermal 68 89 92 125 190 321 0 1 1 6.8 6.1 Solar PV 32 554 665 1 715 2 764 5 478 2 8 14 13.8 10.6 CSP 2 11 15 22 54 174 0 0 0 12.4 12.4 Marine 1 1 1 2 9 47 0 0 0 20.5 19.4 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 5 191 7 228 7 484 8 832 10 195 13 418 100 100 100 2.8 2.8 Coal 1 626 2 089 2 124 2 079 2 009 1 919 28 20 14 -0.5 -0.5 Oil 438 443 440 344 291 239 6 3 2 -3.7 -2.9 Natural gas 1 377 1 751 1 788 1 999 2 185 2 571 24 21 19 1.8 1.7 Nuclear 402 420 415 418 440 479 6 4 4 0.5 0.7 Renewables 1 347 2 516 2 707 3 944 5 137 7 738 36 50 58 6.0 5.1 Hydro 1 027 1 294 1 306 1 428 1 549 1 771 17 15 13 1.6 1.5 Bioenergy 87 145 153 190 218 278 2 2 2 3.3 2.9 Wind 181 563 623 978 1 299 1 914 8 13 14 6.9 5.5 Geothermal 11 14 15 20 29 47 0 0 0 6.0 5.6 Solar PV 40 495 603 1 319 2 019 3 655 8 20 27 11.6 9.0 CSP 1 6 6 9 20 55 0 0 0 11.0 10.9 Marine 0 1 1 1 4 19 0 0 0 18.8 18.3 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 30 420 33 283 33 292 32 972 33 239 33 274 100 100 100 -0.0 -0.0 Coal 13 828 14 766 14 535 13 657 13 284 12 438 44 40 37 -0.8 -0.7 Oil 10 554 11 416 11 497 11 478 11 704 11 582 35 35 35 0.2 0.0 Natural gas 6 038 7 101 7 260 7 837 8 252 9 256 22 25 28 1.2 1.2 Power sector 12 393 13 823 13 699 13 011 12 782 12 477 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.4 Coal 8 930 10 104 9 914 9 238 9 014 8 456 72 71 68 -0.9 -0.8 Oil 844 648 648 537 449 375 5 4 3 -3.3 -2.6 Natural gas 2 620 3 072 3 136 3 237 3 318 3 646 23 26 29 0.5 0.7 Final consumption 16 385 17 848 18 011 18 213 18 635 18 904 100 100 100 0.3 0.2 Coal 4 474 4 326 4 302 4 117 3 978 3 702 24 21 20 -0.7 -0.7 Oil 9 081 10 195 10 273 10 367 10 672 10 645 57 57 56 0.3 0.2 Transport 6 802 7 989 8 033 8 218 8 557 8 603 45 46 46 0.6 0.3 Natural gas 2 830 3 327 3 435 3 729 3 984 4 558 19 21 24 1.4 1.4 Process emissions 1 891 2 395 2 492 2 611 2 785 3 055 100 100 100 1.0 1.0 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 345Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – World A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 21 524 26 619 26 942 28 874 31 465 38 774 100 100 100 1.4 1.7 Coal 8 662 10 160 9 849 7 101 4 864 1 951 37 15 5 -6.2 -7.4 Oil 970 786 785 502 326 187 3 1 0 -7.7 -6.6 Natural gas 4 842 6 150 6 317 7 007 6 465 4 550 23 21 12 0.2 -1.6 Nuclear 2 756 2 710 2 789 2 930 3 435 4 320 10 11 11 1.9 2.1 Renewables 4 260 6 778 7 167 11 305 16 345 27 737 27 52 72 7.8 6.7 Hydro 3 448 4 214 4 305 4 839 5 521 6 690 16 18 17 2.3 2.1 Bioenergy 367 635 667 991 1 282 2 155 2 4 6 6.1 5.7 Wind 342 1 273 1 423 2 952 4 770 8 680 5 15 22 11.6 9.0 Geothermal 68 89 92 158 293 553 0 1 1 11.1 8.9 Solar PV 32 554 665 2 316 4 315 8 799 2 14 23 18.5 13.1 CSP 2 11 15 44 149 788 0 0 2 23.2 20.8 Marine 1 1 1 4 14 70 0 0 0 25.6 21.7 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 5 191 7 228 7 484 9 459 11 650 16 550 100 100 100 4.1 3.9 Coal 1 626 2 089 2 124 1 911 1 603 1 053 28 14 6 -2.5 -3.3 Oil 438 443 440 336 276 229 6 2 1 -4.1 -3.1 Natural gas 1 377 1 751 1 788 1 951 2 022 2 121 24 17 13 1.1 0.8 Nuclear 402 420 415 430 488 599 6 4 4 1.5 1.8 Renewables 1 347 2 516 2 707 4 745 7 037 11 764 36 60 71 9.1 7.2 Hydro 1 027 1 294 1 306 1 499 1 696 2 029 17 15 12 2.4 2.1 Bioenergy 87 145 153 211 266 423 2 2 3 5.2 5.0 Wind 181 563 623 1 216 1 846 3 058 8 16 18 10.4 7.9 Geothermal 11 14 15 25 45 82 0 0 0 10.5 8.4 Solar PV 40 495 603 1 774 3 125 5 891 8 27 36 16.1 11.5 CSP 1 6 6 17 52 253 0 0 2 21.2 19.3 Marine 0 1 1 2 6 29 0 0 0 23.8 20.5 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 30 420 33 283 33 291 29 001 24 261 14 704 100 100 100 -2.8 -3.8 Coal 13 828 14 766 14 535 11 037 7 952 3 336 44 33 23 -5.3 -6.8 Oil 10 554 11 416 11 497 10 493 9 433 6 358 35 39 43 -1.8 -2.8 Natural gas 6 038 7 101 7 260 7 473 6 895 5 211 22 28 35 -0.5 -1.6 Power sector 12 393 13 823 13 699 10 656 7 786 3 185 100 100 100 -5.0 -6.7 Coal 8 930 10 104 9 914 7 010 4 630 1 254 72 59 39 -6.7 -9.4 Oil 844 648 648 429 293 187 5 4 6 -7.0 -5.7 Natural gas 2 620 3 072 3 136 3 218 2 866 1 861 23 37 58 -0.8 -2.5 Final consumption 16 385 17 848 18 011 16 722 15 016 10 446 100 100 100 -1.6 -2.6 Coal 4 474 4 326 4 302 3 747 3 084 1 911 24 21 18 -3.0 -3.8 Oil 9 081 10 195 10 273 9 549 8 675 5 878 57 58 56 -1.5 -2.6 Transport 6 802 7 989 8 033 7 578 6 958 4 697 45 46 45 -1.3 -2.5 Natural gas 2 830 3 327 3 435 3 425 3 257 2 657 19 22 25 -0.5 -1.2 Process emissions 1 891 2 395 2 492 2 469 2 449 2 241 100 100 100 -0.2 -0.5 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 346Table A.3: Energy demand – North America 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 2 656 2 710 2 704 2 641 2 629 2 571 100 100 100 -0.3 -0.2 Coal 539 348 302 186 143 88 11 5 3 -6.6 -5.7 Oil 997 989 992 958 943 855 37 36 33 -0.5 -0.7 Natural gas 686 880 905 956 961 967 33 37 38 0.5 0.3 Nuclear 244 249 251 226 212 179 9 8 7 -1.5 -1.6 Hydro 56 61 59 66 68 72 2 3 3 1.2 0.9 Bioenergy 111 131 138 155 174 205 5 7 8 2.1 1.9 Other renewables 24 51 56 94 128 207 2 5 8 7.8 6.4 Power sector 1 084 1 036 1 016 939 909 891 100 100 100 -1.0 -0.6 Coal 490 314 267 154 111 57 26 12 6 -7.7 -7.1 Oil 24 20 19 8 5 2 2 0 0 -12.4 -9.5 Natural gas 226 319 343 373 369 362 34 41 41 0.7 0.3 Nuclear 244 249 251 226 212 179 25 23 20 -1.5 -1.6 Hydro 56 61 59 66 68 72 6 7 8 1.2 0.9 Bioenergy 23 26 25 28 30 35 2 3 4 1.5 1.6 Other renewables 21 48 52 85 115 184 5 13 21 7.5 6.2 Other energy sector 218 227 227 271 285 302 100 100 100 2.1 1.4 Electricity 65 61 61 62 62 64 27 22 21 0.2 0.3 Total final consumption 1 818 1 925 1 935 1 915 1 930 1 906 100 100 100 -0.0 -0.1 Coal 34 23 22 21 21 21 1 1 1 -0.7 -0.4 Oil 926 934 937 903 887 793 48 46 42 -0.5 -0.8 Natural gas 377 448 449 438 437 437 23 23 23 -0.3 -0.1 Electricity 385 405 402 410 422 456 21 22 24 0.4 0.6 Heat 7 7 7 6 6 5 0 0 0 -1.3 -1.5 Bioenergy 86 105 113 127 144 169 6 7 9 2.2 1.9 Other renewables 2 4 4 9 13 22 0 1 1 10.5 8.2 Industry 350 360 364 369 379 391 100 100 100 0.4 0.3 Coal 32 22 22 20 20 20 6 5 5 -0.8 -0.4 Oil 45 33 33 28 28 28 9 7 7 -1.5 -0.8 Natural gas 134 163 163 171 174 175 45 46 45 0.6 0.3 Electricity 97 95 96 98 101 107 26 27 27 0.4 0.5 Heat 6 6 6 5 5 4 2 1 1 -0.9 -1.1 Bioenergy 36 41 44 46 50 55 12 13 14 1.2 1.1 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 36.2 22.1 Transport 708 760 765 732 724 669 100 100 100 -0.5 -0.6 Oil 663 693 695 650 627 538 91 87 80 -0.9 -1.2 Electricity 1 2 2 4 8 21 0 1 3 13.5 12.1 Bioenergy 25 40 42 52 62 77 5 9 11 3.6 2.9 Other fuels 19 25 26 26 27 34 3 4 5 0.3 1.3 Buildings 568 596 595 578 574 580 100 100 100 -0.3 -0.1 Coal 2 0 0 0 0 - 0 0 - -9.1 n.a.
Oil 49 37 36 29 23 13 6 4 2 -3.9 -4.7 Natural gas 207 229 229 210 201 193 38 35 33 -1.1 -0.8 Electricity 283 302 298 303 309 323 50 54 56 0.3 0.4 Heat 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 -3.1 -3.0 Bioenergy 24 23 26 27 28 31 4 5 5 0.6 0.8 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 2 4 4 8 12 20 1 2 3 9.7 7.6 Other 192 209 212 237 254 266 100 100 100 1.7 1.1 Petrochem.
Feedstock 114 84 87 100 107 111 41 42 42 1.8 1.2 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 347Table A.3: Energy demand – North America A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 2 656 2 710 2 704 2 448 2 271 1 949 100 100 100 -1.6 -1.5 Coal 539 348 302 70 41 29 11 2 1 -16.5 -10.5 Oil 997 989 992 859 748 465 37 33 24 -2.5 -3.5 Natural gas 686 880 905 911 754 518 33 33 27 -1.6 -2.6 Nuclear 244 249 251 230 231 215 9 10 11 -0.7 -0.7 Hydro 56 61 59 66 69 74 2 3 4 1.4 1.1 Bioenergy 111 131 138 192 234 278 5 10 14 4.9 3.4 Other renewables 24 51 56 120 194 370 2 9 19 11.9 9.4 Power sector 1 084 1 036 1 016 849 794 793 100 100 100 -2.2 -1.2 Coal 490 314 267 43 19 13 26 2 2 -21.5 -13.4 Oil 24 20 19 6 2 0 2 0 0 -17.4 -17.0 Natural gas 226 319 343 368 263 95 34 33 12 -2.4 -5.9 Nuclear 244 249 251 230 231 215 25 29 27 -0.7 -0.7 Hydro 56 61 59 66 69 74 6 9 9 1.4 1.1 Bioenergy 23 26 25 29 37 67 2 5 8 3.7 4.8 Other renewables 21 48 52 107 173 329 5 22 41 11.5 9.2 Other energy sector 218 227 227 255 239 232 100 100 100 0.5 0.1 Electricity 65 61 61 57 54 61 27 23 26 -1.0 -0.0 Total final consumption 1 818 1 925 1 935 1 801 1 697 1 422 100 100 100 -1.2 -1.5 Coal 34 23 22 18 15 10 1 1 1 -3.6 -3.6 Oil 926 934 937 811 706 434 48 42 31 -2.5 -3.6 Natural gas 377 448 449 400 355 252 23 21 18 -2.1 -2.7 Electricity 385 405 402 390 396 435 21 23 31 -0.2 0.4 Heat 7 7 7 6 5 4 0 0 0 -2.6 -2.9 Bioenergy 86 105 113 163 196 211 6 12 15 5.1 3.0 Other renewables 2 4 4 13 21 41 0 1 3 15.7 11.3 Industry 350 360 364 345 334 308 100 100 100 -0.8 -0.8 Coal 32 22 22 17 14 10 6 4 3 -3.8 -3.6 Oil 45 33 33 25 22 16 9 6 5 -3.9 -3.4 Natural gas 134 163 163 160 150 118 45 45 38 -0.7 -1.5 Electricity 97 95 96 92 95 104 26 28 34 -0.1 0.3 Heat 6 6 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 -2.5 -3.0 Bioenergy 36 41 44 45 47 5 0 12 14 16 0.6 0.6 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 2 5 0 1 2 54.2 31.1 Transport 708 760 765 704 640 461 100 100 100 -1.6 -2.4 Oil 663 693 695 593 499 262 91 78 57 -3.0 -4.5 Electricity 1 2 2 5 14 55 0 2 12 19.6 17.4 Bioenergy 25 40 42 86 111 113 5 17 25 9.3 4.9 Other fuels 19 25 26 19 17 32 3 3 7 -3.9 1.0 Buildings 568 596 595 543 506 445 100 100 100 -1.5 -1.4 Coal 2 0 0 0 0 - 0 0 - -8.4 n.a.
Oil 49 37 36 27 19 6 6 4 1 -5.4 -8.3 Natural gas 207 229 229 188 156 90 38 31 20 -3.4 -4.3 Electricity 283 302 298 287 282 272 50 56 61 -0.5 -0.4 Heat 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 -3.0 -2.5 Bioenergy 24 23 26 27 30 34 4 6 8 1.3 1.3 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 2 4 4 11 18 34 1 4 8 14.1 10.3 Other 192 209 212 209 216 208 100 100 100 0.2 -0.1 Petrochem.
Feedstock 114 84 87 97 103 107 41 48 52 1.5 1.0 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 348Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – North America 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 5 233 5 424 5 388 5 496 5 639 6 057 100 100 100 0.4 0.6 Coal 2 106 1 352 1 152 677 501 266 21 9 4 -7.3 -6.7 Oil 101 84 81 34 21 11 2 0 0 -11.5 -9.2 Natural gas 1 217 1 785 1 922 2 207 2 250 2 269 36 40 37 1.4 0.8 Nuclear 935 956 962 867 812 687 18 14 11 -1.5 -1.6 Renewables 867 1 242 1 265 1 708 2 053 2 822 23 36 47 4.5 3.9 Hydro 651 714 688 763 788 832 13 14 14 1.2 0.9 Bioenergy 83 91 88 102 111 130 2 2 2 2.2 1.9 Wind 105 322 357 538 675 940 7 12 16 6.0 4.7 Geothermal 24 24 24 28 34 48 0 1 1 3.3 3.4 Solar PV 3 87 105 273 436 848 2 8 14 13.8 10.5 CSP 1 4 4 4 6 17 0 0 0 5.5 7.7 Marine 0 0 0 0 2 7 0 0 0 46.5 29.4 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 1 317 1 435 1 452 1 510 1 651 2 003 100 100 100 1.2 1.5 Coal 348 280 266 163 111 56 18 7 3 -7.6 -7.1 Oil 89 79 79 47 34 25 5 2 1 -7.5 -5.2 Natural gas 496 547 554 593 649 722 38 39 36 1.4 1.3 Nuclear 126 121 120 111 104 88 8 6 4 -1.2 -1.5 Renewables 257 405 432 588 726 1 015 30 44 51 4.8 4.2 Hydro 188 197 196 200 204 211 13 12 11 0.3 0.4 Bioenergy 18 22 22 23 25 28 2 2 1 1.3 1.2 Wind 44 112 124 172 208 264 9 13 13 4.9 3.7 Geothermal 4 5 5 5 6 7 0 0 0 1.9 2.3 Solar PV 3 68 84 186 280 497 6 17 25 11.6 8.8 CSP 0 2 2 2 2 4 0 0 0 2.7 4.5 Marine 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 37.0 24.4 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 6 295 5 914 5 758 5 196 4 921 4 372 100 100 100 -1.4 -1.3 Coal 2 128 1 375 1 189 724 550 320 21 11 7 -6.8 -6.1 Oil 2 573 2 553 2 555 2 351 2 254 1 942 44 46 44 -1.1 -1.3 Natural gas 1 594 1 986 2 015 2 121 2 118 2 111 35 43 48 0.5 0.2 Power sector 2 579 2 075 1 944 1 521 1 329 1 076 100 100 100 -3.4 -2.8 Coal 1 970 1 260 1 075 620 447 217 55 34 20 -7.7 -7.3 Oil 78 65 64 26 15 8 3 1 1 -12.3 -9.5 Natural gas 531 750 804 875 867 851 41 65 79 0.7 0.3 Final consumption 3 299 3 425 3 424 3 206 3 108 2 803 100 100 100 -0.9 -0.9 Coal 146 104 103 93 92 90 3 3 3 -1.0 -0.6 Oil 2 304 2 334 2 340 2 162 2 077 1 777 68 67 63 -1.1 -1.3 Transport 1 961 2 052 2 058 1 923 1 857 1 592 60 60 57 -0.9 -1.2 Natural gas 849 987 981 951 940 935 29 30 33 -0.4 -0.2 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 349Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – North America A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 5 233 5 424 5 388 5 200 5 233 5 765 100 100 100 -0.3 0.3 Coal 2 106 1 352 1 152 192 75 47 21 1 1 -22.0 -14.1 Oil 101 84 81 26 11 2 2 0 0 -16.7 -16.9 Natural gas 1 217 1 785 1 922 2 145 1 585 547 36 30 9 -1.7 -5.8 Nuclear 935 956 962 883 886 825 18 17 14 -0.7 -0.7 Renewables 867 1 242 1 265 1 953 2 674 4 342 23 51 75 7.0 6.0 Hydro 651 714 688 766 801 858 13 15 15 1.4 1.1 Bioenergy 83 91 88 104 143 265 2 3 5 4.5 5.4 Wind 105 322 357 646 936 1 529 7 18 27 9.1 7.2 Geothermal 24 24 24 29 43 73 0 1 1 5.3 5.4 Solar PV 3 87 105 399 718 1 466 2 14 25 19.1 13.4 CSP 1 4 4 8 32 139 0 1 2 22.0 19.1 Marine 0 0 0 0 2 13 0 0 0 46.8 33.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 1 317 1 435 1 452 1 587 1 823 2 526 100 100 100 2.1 2.7 Coal 348 280 266 161 96 33 18 5 1 -8.8 -9.5 Oil 89 79 79 37 21 12 5 1 0 -11.5 -8.7 Natural gas 496 547 554 538 524 550 38 29 22 -0.5 -0.0 Nuclear 126 121 120 113 114 117 8 6 5 -0.4 -0.1 Renewables 257 405 432 713 1 005 1 619 30 55 64 8.0 6.5 Hydro 188 197 196 201 208 218 13 11 9 0.5 0.5 Bioenergy 18 22 22 25 34 58 2 2 2 3.9 4.8 Wind 44 112 124 206 284 425 9 16 17 7.9 6.1 Geothermal 4 5 5 5 7 11 0 0 0 4.0 4.3 Solar PV 3 68 84 272 462 861 6 25 34 16.8 11.7 CSP 0 2 2 3 11 40 0 1 2 17.7 16.1 Marine 0 0 0 0 1 4 0 0 0 37.2 28.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 6 295 5 914 5 758 4 400 3 474 1 748 100 100 100 -4.5 -5.5 Coal 2 128 1 375 1 189 259 112 58 21 3 3 -19.4 -13.4 Oil 2 573 2 553 2 555 2 135 1 782 942 44 51 54 -3.2 -4.6 Natural gas 1 594 1 986 2 015 2 006 1 584 794 35 46 45 -2.2 -4.3 Power sector 2 579 2 075 1 944 1 054 639 88 100 100 100 -9.6 -13.7 Coal 1 970 1 260 1 075 169 39 10 55 6 12 -26.1 -19.9 Oil 78 65 64 20 8 1 3 1 1 -17.3 -17.0 Natural gas 531 750 804 865 596 117 41 93 133 -2.7 -8.8 Final consumption 3 299 3 425 3 424 2 914 2 458 1 397 100 100 100 -3.0 -4.2 Coal 146 104 103 81 65 43 3 3 3 -4.0 -4.0 Oil 2 304 2 334 2 340 1 972 1 647 867 68 67 62 -3.1 -4.6 Transport 1 961 2 052 2 058 1 756 1 476 774 60 60 55 -3.0 -4.5 Natural gas 849 987 981 862 746 487 29 30 35 -2.5 -3.3 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 350Table A.3: Energy demand – United States 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 2 215 2 228 2 213 2 147 2 121 2 020 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.4 Coal 503 321 275 173 132 79 12 6 4 -6.5 -5.8 Oil 806 802 802 774 758 668 36 36 33 -0.5 -0.9 Natural gas 556 709 730 765 764 747 33 36 37 0.4 0.1 Nuclear 219 219 220 202 188 149 10 9 7 -1.4 -1.8 Hydro 23 25 24 26 27 28 1 1 1 1.0 0.8 Bioenergy 89 108 115 127 144 170 5 7 8 2.1 1.9 Other renewables 19 44 48 79 109 178 2 5 9 7.8 6.5 Power sector 936 874 849 781 749 710 100 100 100 -1.1 -0.8 Coal 463 295 250 149 108 56 29 14 8 -7.3 -6.9 Oil 11 10 8 4 3 2 1 0 0 -8.2 -6.9 Natural gas 185 264 283 307 303 289 33 40 41 0.6 0.1 Nuclear 219 219 220 202 188 149 26 25 21 -1.4 -1.8 Hydro 23 25 24 26 27 28 3 4 4 1.0 0.8 Bioenergy 20 21 20 22 23 27 2 3 4 1.3 1.6 Other renewables 17 40 44 71 98 158 5 13 22 7.6 6.3 Other energy sector 154 155 155 181 187 187 100 100 100 1.7 0.9 Electricity 51 50 49 50 49 49 32 26 26 0.0 -0.0 Total final consumption 1 513 1 595 1 601 1 580 1 585 1 542 100 100 100 -0.1 -0.2 Coal 27 17 17 15 15 15 1 1 1 -0.7 -0.4 Oil 762 765 766 738 722 632 48 46 41 -0.5 -0.9 Natural gas 322 381 382 371 368 364 24 23 24 -0.3 -0.2 Electricity 326 335 331 335 342 362 21 22 23 0.3 0.4 Heat 7 6 6 6 5 4 0 0 0 -1.4 -1.6 Bioenergy 68 87 95 106 120 142 6 8 9 2.2 1.9 Other renewables 2 4 4 8 12 20 0 1 1 10.4 8.1 Industry 274 276 282 282 289 295 100 100 100 0.2 0.2 Coal 25 16 16 15 15 15 6 5 5 -0.8 -0.4 Oil 34 21 21 16 16 17 7 6 6 -2.2 -1.0 Natural gas 110 133 136 141 143 140 48 50 48 0.5 0.1 Electricity 71 66 67 67 69 74 24 24 25 0.3 0.5 Heat 5 5 5 5 4 4 2 2 1 -1.0 -1.2 Bioenergy 29 34 37 38 41 44 13 14 15 0.8 0.8 Other renewables - - - 0 0 1 - 0 0 n.a.
Transport 596 639 642 612 601 543 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.8 Oil 556 578 579 539 515 426 90 86 78 -1.1 -1.5 Electricity 1 1 1 3 6 16 0 1 3 16.3 13.7 Bioenergy 24 38 39 48 57 71 6 10 13 3.5 2.8 Other fuels 16 21 22 22 23 30 3 4 5 0.4 1.4 Buildings 490 509 504 488 482 480 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.2 Coal 2 0 0 0 0 - 0 0 - -9.1 n.a.
Oil 37 26 26 20 15 7 5 3 1 -4.7 -6.2 Natural gas 182 200 197 180 172 164 39 36 34 -1.2 -0.9 Electricity 251 264 259 262 265 270 51 55 56 0.2 0.2 Heat 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 -3.3 -3.2 Bioenergy 15 13 17 17 18 20 3 4 4 0.8 0.9 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 2 4 4 8 11 19 1 2 4 9.8 7.7 Other 153 171 172 198 214 224 100 100 100 2.0 1.2 Petrochem.
Feedstock 95 66 69 84 89 91 40 42 41 2.3 1.3 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 351Table A.3: Energy demand – United States A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 2 215 2 228 2 213 1 987 1 831 1 546 100 100 100 -1.7 -1.7 Coal 503 321 275 59 34 22 12 2 1 -17.3 -11.3 Oil 806 802 802 689 592 353 36 32 23 -2.7 -3.8 Natural gas 556 709 730 744 606 401 33 33 26 -1.7 -2.8 Nuclear 219 219 220 206 207 185 10 11 12 -0.5 -0.8 Hydro 23 25 24 26 27 30 1 1 2 1.3 1.1 Bioenergy 89 108 115 161 199 237 5 11 15 5.1 3.5 Other renewables 19 44 48 101 166 318 2 9 21 12.0 9.4 Power sector 936 874 849 701 650 630 100 100 100 -2.4 -1.4 Coal 463 295 250 39 17 11 29 3 2 -21.6 -13.9 Oil 11 10 8 2 1 0 1 0 0 -15.2 -18.3 Natural gas 185 264 283 316 220 64 33 34 10 -2.3 -6.9 Nuclear 219 219 220 206 207 185 26 32 29 -0.5 -0.8 Hydro 23 25 24 26 27 30 3 4 5 1.3 1.1 Bioenergy 20 21 20 22 29 58 2 4 9 3.6 5.2 Other renewables 17 40 44 90 147 283 5 23 45 11.6 9.3 Other energy sector 154 155 155 175 162 161 100 100 100 0.4 0.2 Electricity 51 50 49 46 43 47 32 27 29 -1.1 -0.2 Total final consumption 1 513 1 595 1 601 1 483 1 388 1 144 100 100 100 -1.3 -1.6 Coal 27 17 17 13 11 7 1 1 1 -4.0 -4.2 Oil 762 765 766 657 564 336 48 41 29 -2.7 -3.8 Natural gas 322 381 382 340 301 213 24 22 19 -2.1 -2.7 Electricity 326 335 331 316 318 339 21 23 30 -0.4 0.1 Heat 7 6 6 5 5 3 0 0 0 -2.6 -3.0 Bioenergy 68 87 95 139 169 179 6 12 16 5.4 3.1 Other renewables 2 4 4 11 18 35 0 1 3 15.1 11.0 Industry 274 276 282 264 254 229 100 100 100 -0.9 -1.0 Coal 25 16 16 13 10 7 6 4 3 -4.2 -4.1 Oil 34 21 21 14 12 8 7 5 4 -5.1 -4.3 Natural gas 110 133 136 133 124 95 48 49 42 -0.8 -1.7 Electricity 71 66 67 62 65 71 24 25 31 -0.3 0.3 Heat 5 5 5 4 4 3 2 1 1 -2.5 -3.0 Bioenergy 29 34 37 37 38 4 0 13 15 17 0.2 0.3 Other renewables - - - 1 2 4 - 1 2 n.a.
Transport 596 639 642 590 530 374 100 100 100 -1.7 -2.5 Oil 556 578 579 489 402 201 90 76 54 -3.3 -4.9 Electricity 1 1 1 4 11 43 0 2 11 23.5 19.1 Bioenergy 24 38 39 80 103 102 6 19 27 9.1 4.7 Other fuels 16 21 22 16 14 28 3 3 8 -4.2 1.2 Buildings 490 509 504 458 426 371 100 100 100 -1.5 -1.5 Coal 2 0 0 0 0 - 0 0 - -8.4 n.a.
Oil 37 26 26 19 13 3 5 3 1 -5.9 -9.3 Natural gas 182 200 197 162 134 78 39 31 21 -3.4 -4.3 Electricity 251 264 259 248 239 224 51 56 60 -0.7 -0.7 Heat 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 -3.3 -3.0 Bioenergy 15 13 17 18 22 26 3 5 7 2.4 2.1 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 2 4 4 10 16 30 1 4 8 13.9 10.2 Other 153 171 172 171 178 169 100 100 100 0.3 -0.1 Petrochem.
Feedstock 95 66 69 82 86 88 40 49 52 2.0 1.2 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 352Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – United States 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 4 354 4 434 4 371 4 431 4 506 4 733 100 100 100 0.3 0.4 Coal 1 994 1 272 1 076 656 488 262 25 11 6 -6.9 -6.5 Oil 48 43 37 19 17 9 1 0 0 -7.0 -6.6 Natural gas 1 018 1 519 1 640 1 861 1 876 1 836 38 42 39 1.2 0.5 Nuclear 839 841 844 776 721 572 19 16 12 -1.4 -1.8 Renewables 452 753 768 1 117 1 402 2 051 18 31 43 5.6 4.8 Hydro 262 296 275 302 308 327 6 7 7 1.0 0.8 Bioenergy 73 78 73 82 90 106 2 2 2 1.9 1.8 Wind 95 276 305 467 583 809 7 13 17 6.1 4.8 Geothermal 18 19 19 20 26 39 0 1 1 2.9 3.6 Solar PV 3 81 93 243 388 750 2 9 16 13.9 10.5 CSP 1 4 4 4 6 16 0 0 0 5.5 7.4 Marine - - - - 1 4 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 1 118 1 204 1 214 1 249 1 365 1 646 100 100 100 1.1 1.5 Coal 328 266 252 153 106 55 21 8 3 -7.6 -7.0 Oil 67 57 57 34 27 23 5 2 1 -6.5 -4.3 Natural gas 451 491 495 516 555 602 41 41 37 1.1 0.9 Nuclear 110 105 104 98 91 73 9 7 4 -1.1 -1.7 Renewables 162 282 304 440 561 809 25 41 49 5.7 4.8 Hydro 101 103 103 103 105 108 8 8 7 0.2 0.2 Bioenergy 15 17 17 18 19 22 1 1 1 1.1 1.2 Wind 39 95 104 146 176 221 9 13 13 4.9 3.7 Geothermal 3 4 4 4 4 6 0 0 0 2.0 2.7 Solar PV 3 62 76 168 254 446 6 19 27 11.6 8.8 CSP 0 2 2 2 2 4 0 0 0 2.7 4.2 Marine - 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 104.0 53.3 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 5 329 4 902 4 738 4 223 3 946 3 366 100 100 100 -1.6 -1.6 Coal 1 982 1 270 1 087 676 510 289 23 13 9 -6.6 -6.1 Oil 2 060 2 031 2 027 1 856 1 764 1 462 43 45 43 -1.3 -1.5 Natural gas 1 287 1 601 1 624 1 692 1 673 1 616 34 42 48 0.3 -0.0 Power sector 2 329 1 836 1 698 1 334 1 156 900 100 100 100 -3.4 -3.0 Coal 1 858 1 185 1 003 599 435 214 59 38 24 -7.3 -7.1 Oil 37 31 28 13 11 6 2 1 1 -8.2 -6.9 Natural gas 435 620 666 722 711 679 39 61 75 0.6 0.1 Final consumption 2 736 2 815 2 811 2 614 2 512 2 209 100 100 100 -1.0 -1.1 Coal 115 78 76 70 69 68 3 3 3 -0.9 -0.5 Oil 1 893 1 900 1 900 1 743 1 656 1 369 68 66 62 -1.2 -1.5 Transport 1 641 1 712 1 715 1 594 1 523 1 262 61 61 57 -1.1 -1.5 Natural gas 728 837 834 801 787 772 30 31 35 -0.5 -0.4 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 353Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – United States A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 4 354 4 434 4 371 4 171 4 153 4 444 100 100 100 -0.5 0.1 Coal 1 994 1 272 1 076 175 69 37 25 2 1 -22.1 -14.8 Oil 48 43 37 12 7 1 1 0 0 -13.8 -17.4 Natural gas 1 018 1 519 1 640 1 865 1 343 358 38 32 8 -1.8 -7.0 Nuclear 839 841 844 792 795 710 19 19 16 -0.5 -0.8 Renewables 452 753 768 1 327 1 937 3 336 18 47 75 8.8 7.2 Hydro 262 296 275 304 317 344 6 8 8 1.3 1.1 Bioenergy 73 78 73 83 118 234 2 3 5 4.5 5.7 Wind 95 276 305 559 809 1 300 7 19 29 9.3 7.2 Geothermal 18 19 19 21 33 63 0 1 1 5.4 6.0 Solar PV 3 81 93 352 628 1 254 2 15 28 19.0 13.2 CSP 1 4 4 8 30 131 0 1 3 21.4 18.8 Marine - - - 0 1 10 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 1 118 1 204 1 214 1 317 1 517 2 094 100 100 100 2.0 2.6 Coal 328 266 252 151 91 31 21 6 1 -8.8 -9.5 Oil 67 57 57 24 14 8 5 1 0 -11.9 -8.7 Natural gas 451 491 495 470 449 456 41 30 22 -0.9 -0.4 Nuclear 110 105 104 100 102 102 9 7 5 -0.2 -0.1 Renewables 162 282 304 548 801 1 318 25 53 63 9.2 7.2 Hydro 101 103 103 104 108 113 8 7 5 0.4 0.5 Bioenergy 15 17 17 18 26 49 1 2 2 3.7 5.2 Wind 39 95 104 175 240 353 9 16 17 7.9 6.0 Geothermal 3 4 4 4 6 10 0 0 0 4.4 5.0 Solar PV 3 62 76 244 411 751 6 27 36 16.6 11.6 CSP 0 2 2 3 10 38 0 1 2 17.1 15.7 Marine - 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 103.7 59.1 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 5 329 4 902 4 738 3 537 2 729 1 256 100 100 100 -4.9 -6.1 Coal 1 982 1 270 1 087 219 87 42 23 3 3 -20.5 -14.4 Oil 2 060 2 031 2 027 1 681 1 378 691 43 51 55 -3.4 -5.0 Natural gas 1 287 1 601 1 624 1 638 1 267 569 34 46 45 -2.2 -4.9 Power sector 2 329 1 836 1 698 904 532 13 100 100 100 -10.0 -20.6 Coal 1 858 1 185 1 003 153 36 9 59 7 69 -26.2 -20.0 Oil 37 31 28 8 5 0 2 1 3 -15.2 -18.3 Natural gas 435 620 666 742 495 44 39 93 327 -2.7 -12.1 Final consumption 2 736 2 815 2 811 2 371 1 972 1 084 100 100 100 -3.2 -4.4 Coal 115 78 76 59 47 29 3 2 3 -4.3 -4.4 Oil 1 893 1 900 1 900 1 583 1 296 648 68 66 60 -3.4 -5.0 Transport 1 641 1 712 1 715 1 447 1 191 595 61 60 55 -3.3 -4.9 Natural gas 728 837 834 729 629 407 30 32 37 -2.5 -3.4 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 354Table A.3: Energy demand – Central and South America 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 608 637 628 667 723 873 100 100 100 1.3 1.6 Coal 26 32 30 26 27 29 5 4 3 -1.1 -0.1 Oil 270 253 247 260 269 291 39 37 33 0.8 0.8 Natural gas 124 138 132 133 146 196 21 20 22 0.9 1.9 Nuclear 6 6 6 6 9 19 1 1 2 4.0 5.7 Hydro 60 61 62 69 77 93 10 11 11 1.9 1.9 Bioenergy 120 136 137 150 162 190 22 22 22 1.5 1.6 Other renewables 3 11 13 23 33 55 2 5 6 8.7 7.1 Power sector 156 184 187 191 213 283 100 100 100 1.2 2.0 Coal 10 15 15 10 9 8 8 4 3 -5.0 -3.1 Oil 32 23 23 21 18 15 12 8 5 -2.5 -2.0 Natural gas 37 50 50 42 46 67 27 22 24 -0.7 1.4 Nuclear 6 6 6 6 9 19 3 4 7 4.0 5.7 Hydro 60 61 62 69 77 93 33 36 33 1.9 1.9 Bioenergy 10 19 18 22 24 30 10 11 11 2.7 2.4 Other renewables 3 10 12 21 30 50 6 14 18 8.7 7.1 Other energy sector 97 85 79 89 97 117 100 100 100 1.9 1.9 Electricity 19 22 23 24 27 34 29 28 29 1.6 2.0 Total final consumption 452 480 476 513 555 659 100 100 100 1.4 1.6 Coal 11 12 11 13 14 17 2 3 3 1.9 1.8 Oil 210 220 214 226 235 256 45 42 39 0.8 0.9 Natural gas 62 60 58 64 72 92 12 13 14 1.9 2.2 Electricity 78 89 91 102 116 152 19 21 23 2.2 2.5 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 91 98 100 108 116 137 21 21 21 1.4 1.5 Other renewables 0 1 1 2 3 5 0 1 1 8.8 7.5 Industry 148 145 143 157 174 209 100 100 100 1.8 1.8 Coal 11 12 11 12 14 16 8 8 8 1.9 1.8 Oil 31 25 24 26 26 27 17 15 13 0.6 0.4 Natural gas 28 29 28 34 40 54 20 23 26 3.1 3.1 Electricity 35 36 36 41 46 58 25 27 27 2.2 2.2 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 42 43 43 45 48 55 30 28 26 1.0 1.2 Other renewables - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 93.7 47.2 Transport 146 174 172 181 194 231 100 100 100 1.1 1.4 Oil 123 143 140 145 151 169 81 78 73 0.7 0.9 Electricity 1 0 0 1 1 4 0 1 2 9.6 10.3 Bioenergy 15 22 24 30 36 51 14 18 22 3.6 3.6 Other fuels 7 8 8 6 5 7 5 3 3 -3.2 -0.3 Buildings 104 116 116 122 130 154 100 100 100 1.1 1.4 Coal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -3.9 -3.7 Oil 19 21 20 21 21 22 18 16 14 0.2 0.2 Natural gas 13 15 14 15 17 20 12 13 13 1.4 1.5 Electricity 40 50 51 56 64 84 44 49 55 2.1 2.5 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 30 29 29 28 27 23 25 20 15 -0.8 -1.1 Traditional biomass 26 26 26 25 23 19 23 18 13 -1.1 -1.5 Other renewables 0 1 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 8.3 7.2 Other 55 45 45 53 58 65 100 100 100 2.3 1.8 Petrochem.
Feedstock 25 17 17 21 23 26 38 40 40 2.7 2.0 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 355Table A.3: Energy demand – Central and South America A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 608 637 628 625 627 676 100 100 100 -0.0 0.4 Coal 26 32 30 20 15 13 5 2 2 -6.1 -4.0 Oil 270 253 247 235 213 174 39 34 26 -1.3 -1.7 Natural gas 124 138 132 122 121 108 21 19 16 -0.8 -1.0 Nuclear 6 6 6 6 9 21 1 1 3 4.0 6.2 Hydro 60 61 62 70 78 95 10 12 14 2.1 2.1 Bioenergy 120 136 137 145 144 177 22 23 26 0.4 1.2 Other renewables 3 11 13 28 46 89 2 7 13 12.1 9.6 Power sector 156 184 187 176 186 246 100 100 100 -0.0 1.3 Coal 10 15 15 5 1 0 8 1 0 -22.0 -19.6 Oil 32 23 23 11 4 2 12 2 1 -14.7 -10.1 Natural gas 37 50 50 36 28 15 27 15 6 -5.1 -5.4 Nuclear 6 6 6 6 9 21 3 5 9 4.0 6.2 Hydro 60 61 62 70 78 95 33 42 39 2.1 2.1 Bioenergy 10 19 18 23 25 33 10 14 13 3.0 2.8 Other renewables 3 10 12 25 41 79 6 22 32 11.8 9.4 Other energy sector 97 85 79 89 95 97 100 100 100 1.7 1.0 Electricity 19 22 23 23 25 30 29 26 31 0.7 1.3 Total final consumption 452 480 476 481 480 506 100 100 100 0.1 0.3 Coal 11 12 11 11 11 10 2 2 2 -0.4 -0.7 Oil 210 220 214 212 197 161 45 41 32 -0.8 -1.3 Natural gas 62 60 58 51 50 48 12 10 10 -1.3 -0.9 Electricity 78 89 91 98 110 144 19 23 29 1.8 2.2 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 91 98 100 102 98 121 21 20 24 -0.2 0.9 Other renewables 0 1 1 3 5 10 0 1 2 14.7 11.1 Industry 148 145 143 150 150 160 100 100 100 0.4 0.5 Coal 11 12 11 11 11 10 8 7 6 -0.4 -0.7 Oil 31 25 24 24 22 19 17 15 12 -1.0 -1.2 Natural gas 28 29 28 31 32 34 20 21 22 1.1 0.9 Electricity 35 36 36 39 44 55 25 29 34 1.7 2.0 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 42 43 43 44 41 4 1 30 27 25 -0.5 -0.2 Other renewables - 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 1 122.4 58.4 Transport 146 174 172 174 172 170 100 100 100 -0.0 -0.1 Oil 123 143 140 134 121 93 81 70 55 -1.3 -1.9 Electricity 1 0 0 1 2 6 0 1 3 13.0 12.7 Bioenergy 15 22 24 35 46 66 14 27 39 6.0 4.9 Other fuels 7 8 8 5 4 5 5 2 3 -5.5 -2.5 Buildings 104 116 116 110 104 119 100 100 100 -1.0 0.1 Coal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -8.0 -17.1 Oil 19 21 20 21 20 15 18 20 13 -0.1 -1.4 Natural gas 13 15 14 14 13 9 12 13 8 -0.7 -2.1 Electricity 40 50 51 54 60 79 44 58 66 1.6 2.1 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 30 29 29 18 6 7 25 5 6 -13.8 -6.7 Traditional biomass 26 26 26 13 - - 23 - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 1 1 3 4 9 1 4 7 13.1 10.1 Other 55 45 45 48 54 57 100 100 100 1.7 1.2 Petrochem.
Feedstock 25 17 17 17 22 23 38 41 41 2.3 1.5 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 356Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Central and South America 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 1 130 1 302 1 333 1 477 1 669 2 174 100 100 100 2.1 2.4 Coal 39 67 68 43 37 35 5 2 2 -5.4 -3.2 Oil 148 98 99 91 79 69 7 5 3 -2.1 -1.7 Natural gas 178 246 249 232 254 374 19 15 17 0.2 2.0 Nuclear 22 23 23 25 36 74 2 2 3 4.0 5.7 Renewables 744 867 894 1 086 1 263 1 621 67 76 75 3.2 2.9 Hydro 694 713 723 801 892 1 083 54 53 50 1.9 1.9 Bioenergy 43 72 72 91 98 117 5 6 5 2.9 2.4 Wind 3 66 77 128 169 241 6 10 11 7.4 5.6 Geothermal 3 4 4 5 8 17 0 0 1 5.7 6.6 Solar PV 0 12 18 60 94 157 1 6 7 16.0 10.7 CSP - - - 0 2 7 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 258 362 376 434 490 633 100 100 100 2.4 2.5 Coal 8 13 14 14 12 10 4 2 2 -1.0 -1.5 Oil 41 49 49 43 37 34 13 8 5 -2.5 -1.8 Natural gas 50 68 70 72 84 131 19 17 21 1.7 3.0 Nuclear 3 4 4 3 5 10 1 1 2 2.3 4.8 Renewables 157 228 240 301 350 445 64 71 70 3.5 3.0 Hydro 144 180 186 195 210 241 49 43 38 1.1 1.3 Bioenergy 11 20 20 23 24 28 5 5 4 1.8 1.6 Wind 1 20 23 42 54 75 6 11 12 8.3 5.9 Geothermal 1 1 1 1 1 3 0 0 0 4.7 5.6 Solar PV 0 7 11 40 60 95 3 12 15 17.1 11.1 CSP - - - 0 1 2 - 0 0 n.a.
Marine - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 24.4 12.1 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 061 1 121 1 100 1 097 1 144 1 315 100 100 100 0.4 0.9 Coal 98 125 121 103 104 112 11 9 9 -1.3 -0.4 Oil 710 709 695 710 728 784 63 64 60 0.4 0.6 Natural gas 253 287 284 284 311 419 26 27 32 0.8 1.9 Power sector 231 256 261 212 206 245 100 100 100 -2.1 -0.3 Coal 46 68 70 47 42 38 27 20 16 -4.6 -2.8 Oil 100 72 74 66 56 49 28 27 20 -2.5 -2.0 Natural gas 86 116 117 99 108 158 45 52 64 -0.7 1.4 Final consumption 726 769 746 779 824 936 100 100 100 0.9 1.1 Coal 49 52 47 52 58 69 6 7 7 2.0 1.9 Oil 564 603 587 606 630 692 79 76 74 0.6 0.8 Transport 372 432 420 435 454 509 56 55 54 0.7 0.9 Natural gas 113 114 112 121 136 175 15 16 19 1.8 2.2 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 357Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Central and South America A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 1 130 1 302 1 333 1 422 1 577 2 039 100 100 100 1.5 2.0 Coal 39 67 68 23 5 1 5 0 0 -21.8 -19.3 Oil 148 98 99 50 18 10 7 1 1 -14.6 -10.2 Natural gas 178 246 249 206 170 100 19 11 5 -3.4 -4.2 Nuclear 22 23 23 25 36 82 2 2 4 4.0 6.2 Renewables 744 867 894 1 117 1 349 1 844 67 86 90 3.8 3.5 Hydro 694 713 723 809 907 1 110 54 58 54 2.1 2.1 Bioenergy 43 72 72 90 99 125 5 6 6 3.0 2.7 Wind 3 66 77 129 182 302 6 12 15 8.2 6.7 Geothermal 3 4 4 7 14 31 0 1 2 11.0 9.8 Solar PV 0 12 18 81 141 258 1 9 13 20.4 13.4 CSP - - - 2 6 18 - 0 1 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 258 362 376 452 524 697 100 100 100 3.1 3.0 Coal 8 13 14 13 10 5 4 2 1 -2.6 -4.3 Oil 41 49 49 43 38 34 13 7 5 -2.4 -1.7 Natural gas 50 68 70 71 76 87 19 15 12 0.8 1.1 Nuclear 3 4 4 3 5 11 1 1 2 2.3 5.3 Renewables 157 228 240 319 392 545 64 75 78 4.6 4.0 Hydro 144 180 186 197 212 252 49 41 36 1.2 1.5 Bioenergy 11 20 20 23 24 29 5 5 4 1.7 1.7 Wind 1 20 23 42 59 95 6 11 14 9.2 7.1 Geothermal 1 1 1 1 2 5 0 0 1 9.5 8.4 Solar PV 0 7 11 55 91 158 3 17 23 21.7 13.8 CSP - - - 1 2 6 - 0 1 n.a.
Marine - 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0.0 56.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 061 1 121 1 100 982 844 648 100 100 100 -2.4 -2.5 Coal 98 125 121 73 52 41 11 6 6 -7.4 -5.0 Oil 710 709 695 637 564 436 63 67 67 -1.9 -2.2 Natural gas 253 287 284 272 231 177 26 27 27 -1.9 -2.2 Power sector 231 256 261 145 83 45 100 100 100 -9.9 -8.0 Coal 46 68 70 23 4 1 27 5 2 -22.5 -19.8 Oil 100 72 74 36 13 8 28 16 18 -14.7 -10.1 Natural gas 86 116 117 86 66 36 45 79 81 -5.1 -5.4 Final consumption 726 769 746 723 666 538 100 100 100 -1.0 -1.5 Coal 49 52 47 46 44 38 6 7 7 -0.6 -1.1 Oil 564 603 587 566 517 406 79 78 76 -1.1 -1.7 Transport 372 432 420 402 362 281 56 54 52 -1.3 -1.9 Natural gas 113 114 112 111 105 94 15 16 17 -0.6 -0.8 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 358Table A.3: Energy demand – Brazil 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 263 283 283 299 326 390 100 100 100 1.3 1.5 Coal 14 17 15 15 15 17 5 5 4 0.1 0.4 Oil 105 104 102 106 112 122 36 34 31 0.8 0.8 Natural gas 24 31 30 30 31 42 11 10 11 0.3 1.6 Nuclear 4 4 4 4 7 12 1 2 3 4.5 5.2 Hydro 35 33 34 35 39 48 12 12 12 1.2 1.6 Bioenergy 82 89 90 98 107 126 32 33 32 1.5 1.6 Other renewables 1 5 6 11 15 23 2 5 6 8.1 6.2 Power sector 58 70 73 75 85 109 100 100 100 1.4 2.0 Coal 3 5 5 4 4 4 7 5 3 -2.3 -1.6 Oil 4 3 2 1 1 1 3 1 1 -6.0 -3.2 Natural gas 7 11 12 10 8 10 16 10 9 -3.3 -1.0 Nuclear 4 4 4 4 7 12 6 8 11 4.5 5.2 Hydro 35 33 34 35 39 48 47 46 44 1.2 1.6 Bioenergy 6 10 10 12 13 15 13 15 14 2.4 2.1 Other renewables 0 4 5 9 13 20 7 16 18 8.5 6.4 Other energy sector 41 44 40 44 48 58 100 100 100 1.7 1.8 Electricity 10 11 12 12 13 17 29 28 29 1.3 1.7 Total final consumption 211 223 226 240 261 310 100 100 100 1.3 1.5 Coal 7 8 7 8 8 10 3 3 3 1.2 1.4 Oil 94 96 96 100 105 115 42 40 37 0.8 0.9 Natural gas 13 13 15 14 16 22 7 6 7 0.8 1.9 Electricity 38 43 44 48 55 70 20 21 23 2.0 2.2 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 59 61 63 68 75 90 28 29 29 1.6 1.8 Other renewables 0 1 1 1 2 3 0 1 1 5.6 5.3 Industry 80 75 76 80 88 105 100 100 100 1.4 1.6 Coal 7 8 7 8 8 10 10 9 9 1.3 1.4 Oil 12 9 9 9 10 11 12 11 10 0.9 0.8 Natural gas 9 9 10 11 13 17 13 14 16 2.3 2.5 Electricity 17 17 18 19 22 26 23 25 25 1.9 1.9 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 34 32 32 32 35 41 42 40 39 1.0 1.3 Other renewables - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Transport 70 85 87 89 96 115 100 100 100 0.9 1.3 Oil 54 63 62 62 65 73 72 68 63 0.4 0.7 Electricity 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 1 2 10.2 10.0 Bioenergy 14 19 21 24 28 38 24 29 33 2.8 2.9 Other fuels 2 3 4 2 2 2 4 2 2 -6.7 -2.2 Buildings 34 39 39 42 46 56 100 100 100 1.4 1.7 Coal - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Oil 7 7 7 7 8 8 18 17 15 0.6 0.7 Natural gas 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 5.4 5.0 Electricity 18 23 24 26 29 39 61 64 69 1.9 2.3 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 8 7 7 6 6 5 17 12 8 -1.4 -1.8 Traditional biomass 8 7 6 6 5 4 16 12 7 -1.5 -2.1 Other renewables 0 1 1 1 2 3 3 4 5 5.2 4.9 Other 27 24 24 29 31 34 100 100 100 2.3 1.6 Petrochem.
Feedstock 9 7 7 10 10 11 29 33 32 3.6 2.1 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 359Table A.3: Energy demand – Brazil A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 263 283 283 285 281 298 100 100 100 -0.0 0.3 Coal 14 17 15 11 10 8 5 3 3 -4.2 -2.8 Oil 105 104 102 98 88 68 36 31 23 -1.4 -1.9 Natural gas 24 31 30 26 21 18 11 7 6 -3.3 -2.4 Nuclear 4 4 4 4 7 12 1 2 4 4.5 5.2 Hydro 35 33 34 35 37 43 12 13 15 0.8 1.1 Bioenergy 82 89 90 99 103 123 32 37 41 1.2 1.5 Other renewables 1 5 6 11 16 25 2 6 8 8.4 6.6 Power sector 58 70 73 71 75 90 100 100 100 0.3 1.0 Coal 3 5 5 1 0 - 7 0 - -33.9 n.a.
Oil 4 3 2 1 1 0 3 1 0 -9.7 -15.7 Natural gas 7 11 12 8 4 1 16 6 1 -8.8 -11.7 Nuclear 4 4 4 4 7 12 6 9 14 4.5 5.2 Hydro 35 33 34 35 37 43 47 50 49 0.8 1.1 Bioenergy 6 10 10 12 12 12 13 16 14 2.0 1.2 Other renewables 0 4 5 9 13 20 7 18 23 8.5 6.6 Other energy sector 41 44 40 42 42 44 100 100 100 0.5 0.5 Electricity 10 11 12 12 12 13 29 28 30 0.2 0.7 Total final consumption 211 223 226 231 228 240 100 100 100 0.1 0.3 Coal 7 8 7 7 7 6 3 3 3 -0.6 -0.9 Oil 94 96 96 93 84 66 42 37 27 -1.3 -1.8 Natural gas 13 13 15 13 11 10 7 5 4 -2.4 -1.6 Electricity 38 43 44 47 51 63 20 23 26 1.3 1.7 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 59 61 63 69 72 90 28 32 38 1.3 1.8 Other renewables 0 1 1 2 2 4 0 1 2 7.9 6.9 Industry 80 75 76 78 75 78 100 100 100 -0.1 0.2 Coal 7 8 7 7 7 6 10 9 8 -0.6 -0.9 Oil 12 9 9 9 8 8 12 11 10 -1.1 -0.9 Natural gas 9 9 10 10 9 8 13 12 10 -0.9 -1.0 Electricity 17 17 18 19 21 24 23 27 31 1.4 1.6 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 34 32 32 33 30 3 1 42 40 40 -0.4 -0.0 Other renewables - - - 0 0 1 - 0 1 n.a.
Transport 70 85 87 86 86 87 100 100 100 -0.1 0.0 Oil 54 63 62 57 48 32 72 56 36 -2.4 -3.2 Electricity 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 1 3 13.1 11.5 Bioenergy 14 19 21 28 36 52 24 42 59 5.1 4.4 Other fuels 2 3 4 1 1 1 4 1 1 -11.9 -5.3 Buildings 34 39 39 38 38 45 100 100 100 -0.3 0.7 Coal - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Oil 7 7 7 7 7 6 18 19 14 -0.0 -0.5 Natural gas 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2.7 1.8 Electricity 18 23 24 25 27 33 61 71 73 1.2 1.6 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 8 7 7 4 1 1 17 2 3 -17.1 -7.2 Traditional biomass 8 7 6 3 - - 16 - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 5 8 6.5 5.9 Other 27 24 24 28 29 30 100 100 100 1.7 1.0 Petrochem.
Feedstock 9 7 7 9 10 10 29 34 33 3.1 1.5 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 360Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Brazil 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 516 601 626 680 770 983 100 100 100 1.9 2.2 Coal 11 23 24 17 16 15 4 2 2 -3.5 -2.2 Oil 16 13 10 6 5 5 2 1 1 -6.2 -3.4 Natural gas 36 55 60 62 50 60 10 6 6 -1.7 -0.0 Nuclear 15 16 16 15 26 47 3 3 5 4.5 5.2 Renewables 437 495 515 580 672 855 82 87 87 2.4 2.4 Hydro 403 389 398 406 451 553 64 59 56 1.2 1.6 Bioenergy 31 54 55 64 68 76 9 9 8 2.0 1.6 Wind 2 48 56 80 100 139 9 13 14 5.4 4.4 Geothermal - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Solar PV - 3 7 30 52 84 1 7 9 20.5 12.8 CSP - - - - 1 3 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 113 164 173 201 229 286 100 100 100 2.6 2.4 Coal 3 4 4 4 4 4 2 2 1 -0.2 -0.5 Oil 7 8 8 7 7 7 5 3 3 -1.0 -0.6 Natural gas 11 13 13 15 16 25 8 7 9 1.9 3.1 Nuclear 2 2 2 2 3 6 1 1 2 5.0 5.5 Renewables 90 137 146 172 198 242 84 86 85 2.8 2.5 Hydro 81 105 110 111 117 131 64 51 46 0.5 0.8 Bioenergy 8 16 16 17 18 20 9 8 7 1.3 1.2 Wind 1 14 15 22 27 36 9 12 13 5.3 4.2 Geothermal - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Solar PV 0 2 4 22 35 54 2 15 19 21.2 12.9 CSP - - - - 0 1 - 0 0 n.a.
Marine - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 372 407 408 406 425 485 100 100 100 0.4 0.8 Coal 54 64 61 56 59 63 15 14 13 -0.2 0.2 Oil 267 274 271 273 288 320 66 68 66 0.5 0.8 Natural gas 51 69 76 76 78 102 19 18 21 0.2 1.4 Power sector 45 60 62 50 44 45 100 100 100 -3.1 -1.5 Coal 18 26 27 22 21 19 44 49 43 -2.3 -1.6 Oil 12 8 7 4 3 3 11 8 7 -6.0 -3.2 Natural gas 16 25 28 24 19 22 45 43 50 -3.3 -1.0 Final consumption 302 319 317 320 342 391 100 100 100 0.7 1.0 Coal 33 33 30 31 34 40 9 10 10 1.2 1.4 Oil 242 255 254 257 271 303 80 79 77 0.6 0.8 Transport 163 190 188 189 197 219 59 58 56 0.4 0.7 Natural gas 28 30 33 32 36 48 10 11 12 0.8 1.8 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 361Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Brazil A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 516 601 626 658 711 859 100 100 100 1.2 1.5 Coal 11 23 24 7 0 - 4 0 - -33.8 -100.0 Oil 16 13 10 5 3 0 2 0 0 -9.7 -15.7 Natural gas 36 55 60 50 27 6 10 4 1 -7.0 -10.8 Nuclear 15 16 16 15 26 47 3 4 5 4.5 5.2 Renewables 437 495 515 580 654 806 82 92 94 2.2 2.2 Hydro 403 389 398 406 435 505 64 61 59 0.8 1.1 Bioenergy 31 54 55 64 66 67 9 9 8 1.7 1.0 Wind 2 48 56 80 100 141 9 14 16 5.4 4.5 Geothermal - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Solar PV - 3 7 30 52 89 1 7 10 20.6 13.1 CSP - - - - 1 4 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 113 164 173 202 226 270 100 100 100 2.5 2.1 Coal 3 4 4 4 4 3 2 2 1 -0.9 -0.9 Oil 7 8 8 7 7 7 5 3 3 -1.0 -0.8 Natural gas 11 13 13 15 16 17 8 7 6 2.0 1.3 Nuclear 2 2 2 2 3 6 1 2 2 5.0 5.5 Renewables 90 137 146 172 193 230 84 85 85 2.6 2.2 Hydro 81 105 110 111 112 117 64 50 43 0.2 0.3 Bioenergy 8 16 16 17 18 19 9 8 7 1.0 0.8 Wind 1 14 15 22 27 37 9 12 14 5.4 4.2 Geothermal - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Solar PV 0 2 4 22 35 57 2 16 21 21.3 13.2 CSP - - - - 0 1 - 0 0 n.a.
Marine - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 372 407 408 357 302 223 100 100 100 -2.7 -2.8 Coal 54 64 61 40 31 27 15 10 12 -5.9 -3.8 Oil 267 274 271 251 220 162 66 73 73 -1.9 -2.4 Natural gas 51 69 76 66 51 38 19 17 17 -3.5 -3.3 Power sector 45 60 62 31 13 2 100 100 100 -13.5 -14.7 Coal 18 26 27 8 0 - 44 2 - -33.9 -100.0 Oil 12 8 7 3 2 0 11 17 8 -9.7 -15.7 Natural gas 16 25 28 20 10 2 45 80 92 -8.8 -11.7 Final consumption 302 319 317 295 260 200 100 100 100 -1.8 -2.2 Coal 33 33 30 29 28 24 9 11 12 -0.7 -1.0 Oil 242 255 254 237 208 154 80 80 77 -1.8 -2.3 Transport 163 190 188 172 145 96 59 56 48 -2.4 -3.2 Natural gas 28 30 33 29 25 21 10 9 11 -2.7 -2.1 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 362Table A.3: Energy demand – Europe 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 2 117 1 983 1 939 1 824 1 765 1 674 100 100 100 -0.9 -0.7 Coal 377 315 271 175 141 114 14 8 7 -5.7 -4.0 Oil 666 623 617 564 516 406 32 29 24 -1.6 -2.0 Natural gas 571 497 495 490 467 438 26 26 26 -0.5 -0.6 Nuclear 269 244 241 210 196 182 12 11 11 -1.9 -1.3 Hydro 55 55 54 61 63 65 3 4 4 1.4 0.9 Bioenergy 149 177 182 207 224 246 9 13 15 1.9 1.4 Other renewables 30 72 79 117 158 223 4 9 13 6.5 5.1 Power sector 896 829 800 731 719 749 100 100 100 -1.0 -0.3 Coal 267 217 182 98 69 49 23 10 7 -8.5 -6.0 Oil 27 16 16 7 5 4 2 1 0 -9.8 -6.9 Natural gas 204 161 164 168 155 149 20 22 20 -0.5 -0.5 Nuclear 269 244 241 210 196 182 30 27 24 -1.9 -1.3 Hydro 55 55 54 61 63 65 7 9 9 1.4 0.9 Bioenergy 49 69 70 82 88 99 9 12 13 2.0 1.7 Other renewables 25 65 72 106 143 200 9 20 27 6.4 5.0 Other energy sector 204 180 174 160 149 139 100 100 100 -1.4 -1.1 Electricity 56 52 51 47 46 49 29 31 35 -1.0 -0.2 Total final consumption 1 462 1 407 1 389 1 362 1 340 1 269 100 100 100 -0.3 -0.4 Coal 66 54 49 43 40 35 4 3 3 -1.8 -1.6 Oil 588 566 560 522 482 380 40 36 30 -1.4 -1.8 Natural gas 330 308 304 292 284 263 22 21 21 -0.6 -0.7 Electricity 298 303 296 307 322 360 21 24 28 0.8 0.9 Heat 75 64 63 63 64 63 5 5 5 0.1 0.0 Bioenergy 99 106 109 123 133 144 8 10 11 1.8 1.3 Other renewables 5 6 7 11 15 23 0 1 2 7.3 5.9 Industry 345 345 338 336 338 339 100 100 100 -0.0 0.0 Coal 40 35 32 30 30 30 10 9 9 -0.6 -0.4 Oil 43 36 35 34 34 33 10 10 10 -0.4 -0.4 Natural gas 102 106 105 101 99 94 31 29 28 -0.5 -0.5 Electricity 112 115 113 115 116 119 33 34 35 0.3 0.2 Heat 25 22 22 22 22 23 7 7 7 0.2 0.2 Bioenergy 23 30 31 33 35 39 9 10 12 1.3 1.2 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 1 7.9 8.3 Transport 373 393 392 378 364 315 100 100 100 -0.7 -1.0 Oil 347 363 359 335 310 237 92 85 75 -1.3 -2.0 Electricity 7 7 7 11 17 38 2 5 12 9.1 8.6 Bioenergy 13 18 20 26 30 32 5 8 10 3.7 2.3 Other fuels 7 6 6 6 7 8 1 2 3 1.2 1.7 Buildings 580 520 511 502 494 478 100 100 100 -0.3 -0.3 Coal 23 15 14 11 8 3 3 2 1 -5.0 -6.9 Oil 73 51 50 37 25 7 10 5 2 -6.0 -8.7 Natural gas 196 177 176 171 164 147 34 33 31 -0.6 -0.8 Electricity 175 175 171 173 181 195 33 37 41 0.5 0.6 Heat 49 41 40 41 41 40 8 8 8 0.0 -0.0 Bioenergy 60 56 55 60 63 67 11 13 14 1.2 0.9 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 5 5 5 9 12 19 1 3 4 8.1 6.2 Other 164 149 148 146 145 138 100 100 100 -0.2 -0.3 Petrochem.
Feedstock 89 81 80 75 74 67 54 51 49 -0.7 -0.8 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 363Table A.3: Energy demand – Europe A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 2 117 1 983 1 939 1 757 1 634 1 441 100 100 100 -1.5 -1.4 Coal 377 315 271 126 82 51 14 5 4 -10.3 -7.6 Oil 666 623 617 523 426 218 32 26 15 -3.3 -4.8 Natural gas 571 497 495 469 390 271 26 24 19 -2.1 -2.8 Nuclear 269 244 241 211 209 219 12 13 15 -1.3 -0.4 Hydro 55 55 54 62 65 69 3 4 5 1.6 1.2 Bioenergy 149 177 182 232 263 284 9 16 20 3.4 2.2 Other renewables 30 72 79 134 200 329 4 12 23 8.8 7.0 Power sector 896 829 800 714 714 823 100 100 100 -1.0 0.1 Coal 267 217 182 56 25 14 23 4 2 -16.5 -11.4 Oil 27 16 16 8 4 2 2 1 0 -11.0 -10.2 Natural gas 204 161 164 170 132 95 20 19 12 -1.9 -2.6 Nuclear 269 244 241 211 209 219 30 29 27 -1.3 -0.4 Hydro 55 55 54 62 65 69 7 9 8 1.6 1.2 Bioenergy 49 69 70 88 101 132 9 14 16 3.3 3.0 Other renewables 25 65 72 120 178 292 9 25 35 8.6 6.9 Other energy sector 204 180 174 155 140 134 100 100 100 -2.0 -1.2 Electricity 56 52 51 52 60 104 29 43 78 1.5 3.5 Total final consumption 1 462 1 407 1 389 1 320 1 235 1 020 100 100 100 -1.1 -1.5 Coal 66 54 49 39 32 20 4 3 2 -3.9 -4.2 Oil 588 566 560 483 396 204 40 32 20 -3.1 -4.7 Natural gas 330 308 304 270 231 147 22 19 14 -2.5 -3.4 Electricity 298 303 296 307 328 381 21 27 37 0.9 1.2 Heat 75 64 63 60 56 49 5 5 5 -1.1 -1.2 Bioenergy 99 106 109 143 160 150 8 13 15 3.6 1.5 Other renewables 5 6 7 14 22 37 0 2 4 11.2 8.4 Industry 345 345 338 319 301 273 100 100 100 -1.0 -1.0 Coal 40 35 32 27 24 18 10 8 7 -2.7 -2.7 Oil 43 36 35 29 24 16 10 8 6 -3.5 -3.6 Natural gas 102 106 105 95 83 58 31 27 21 -2.2 -2.8 Electricity 112 115 113 113 114 120 33 38 44 0.1 0.3 Heat 25 22 22 19 16 12 7 5 4 -2.7 -2.9 Bioenergy 23 30 31 33 36 4 1 9 12 15 1.5 1.4 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 3 5 0 1 2 19.0 13.4 Transport 373 393 392 370 335 223 100 100 100 -1.4 -2.6 Oil 347 363 359 307 246 95 92 73 42 -3.4 -6.1 Electricity 7 7 7 13 28 70 2 8 31 14.1 11.9 Bioenergy 13 18 20 44 56 36 5 17 16 9.7 2.9 Other fuels 7 6 6 5 6 22 1 2 10 -0.2 6.5 Buildings 580 520 511 488 460 401 100 100 100 -1.0 -1.1 Coal 23 15 14 10 6 0 3 1 0 -7.5 -23.0 Oil 73 51 50 35 21 3 10 5 1 -7.4 -12.4 Natural gas 196 177 176 157 132 75 34 29 19 -2.5 -3.9 Electricity 175 175 171 174 177 181 33 38 45 0.3 0.3 Heat 49 41 40 40 39 37 8 9 9 -0.3 -0.5 Bioenergy 60 56 55 60 63 66 11 14 16 1.1 0.8 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 5 5 5 12 18 30 1 4 7 11.8 8.6 Other 164 149 148 143 138 123 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.9 Petrochem.
Feedstock 89 81 80 74 71 61 54 51 50 -1.1 -1.2 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 364Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Europe 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 4 120 4 136 4 028 4 115 4 289 4 783 100 100 100 0.6 0.8 Coal 1 068 891 711 384 277 212 18 6 4 -8.2 -5.6 Oil 93 58 57 27 19 12 1 0 0 -9.5 -7.1 Natural gas 947 820 839 838 752 714 21 18 15 -1.0 -0.8 Nuclear 1 032 937 924 805 752 699 23 18 15 -1.9 -1.3 Renewables 976 1 425 1 492 2 058 2 485 3 141 37 58 66 4.7 3.6 Hydro 641 638 631 715 733 760 16 17 16 1.4 0.9 Bioenergy 146 222 228 274 293 335 6 7 7 2.3 1.9 Wind 154 403 457 731 1 015 1 464 11 24 31 7.5 5.7 Geothermal 11 20 22 26 31 39 1 1 1 3.3 2.8 Solar PV 23 136 148 305 400 495 4 9 10 9.4 5.9 CSP 1 5 6 6 9 21 0 0 0 4.7 6.5 Marine 0 0 1 1 4 26 0 0 1 18.8 20.2 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 1 100 1 300 1 332 1 483 1 624 1 876 100 100 100 1.8 1.6 Coal 246 215 211 127 93 70 16 6 4 -7.1 -5.1 Oil 79 55 55 32 24 16 4 1 1 -7.2 -5.6 Natural gas 244 268 267 285 302 343 20 19 18 1.1 1.2 Nuclear 156 142 139 125 117 107 10 7 6 -1.6 -1.3 Renewables 375 618 657 905 1 064 1 244 49 66 66 4.5 3.1 Hydro 221 249 249 260 266 274 19 16 15 0.6 0.5 Bioenergy 34 50 52 59 62 68 4 4 4 1.7 1.3 Wind 86 189 204 299 370 457 15 23 24 5.6 3.9 Geothermal 1 3 3 4 4 5 0 0 0 2.7 2.5 Solar PV 30 126 147 281 356 422 11 22 22 8.4 5.2 CSP 1 2 3 3 4 7 0 0 0 3.3 5.0 Marine 0 0 0 0 2 12 0 0 1 18.5 19.7 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 4 404 3 917 3 714 3 153 2 821 2 332 100 100 100 -2.5 -2.2 Coal 1 473 1 224 1 039 647 508 402 28 18 17 -6.3 -4.4 Oil 1 673 1 579 1 562 1 401 1 264 954 42 45 41 -1.9 -2.3 Natural gas 1 258 1 115 1 112 1 105 1 049 977 30 37 42 -0.5 -0.6 Power sector 1 695 1 363 1 214 834 674 570 100 100 100 -5.2 -3.5 Coal 1 131 934 780 417 292 210 64 43 37 -8.5 -6.1 Oil 85 49 49 22 16 11 4 2 2 -9.7 -6.9 Natural gas 479 379 385 395 365 350 32 54 61 -0.5 -0.5 Final consumption 2 495 2 350 2 305 2 138 1 987 1 622 100 100 100 -1.3 -1.7 Coal 296 236 214 189 176 153 9 9 9 -1.7 -1.6 Oil 1 471 1 436 1 421 1 299 1 182 889 62 59 55 -1.7 -2.2 Transport 1 049 1 100 1 090 1 017 940 717 47 47 44 -1.3 -2.0 Natural gas 728 678 670 650 629 580 29 32 36 -0.6 -0.7 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 365Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Europe A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 4 120 4 136 4 028 4 172 4 502 5 635 100 100 100 1.0 1.6 Coal 1 068 891 711 208 91 57 18 2 1 -17.0 -11.3 Oil 93 58 57 25 15 6 1 0 0 -11.4 -10.5 Natural gas 947 820 839 903 669 470 21 15 8 -2.0 -2.7 Nuclear 1 032 937 924 811 803 842 23 18 15 -1.3 -0.4 Renewables 976 1 425 1 492 2 220 2 919 4 257 37 65 76 6.3 5.1 Hydro 641 638 631 721 754 803 16 17 14 1.6 1.2 Bioenergy 146 222 228 290 335 450 6 7 8 3.6 3.3 Wind 154 403 457 828 1 247 2 131 11 28 38 9.6 7.6 Geothermal 11 20 22 29 34 48 1 1 1 4.3 3.9 Solar PV 23 136 148 341 526 747 4 12 13 12.2 8.0 CSP 1 5 6 8 16 42 0 0 1 10.0 9.9 Marine 0 0 1 2 6 37 0 0 1 25.2 22.2 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 1 100 1 300 1 332 1 550 1 819 2 286 100 100 100 2.9 2.6 Coal 246 215 211 103 52 17 16 3 1 -12.0 -11.2 Oil 79 55 55 30 22 14 4 1 1 -8.0 -6.2 Natural gas 244 268 267 289 300 283 20 16 12 1.1 0.3 Nuclear 156 142 139 127 126 125 10 7 5 -0.9 -0.5 Renewables 375 618 657 983 1 271 1 691 49 70 74 6.2 4.6 Hydro 221 249 249 263 273 288 19 15 13 0.8 0.7 Bioenergy 34 50 52 63 70 88 4 4 4 2.9 2.6 Wind 86 189 204 333 449 655 15 25 29 7.5 5.7 Geothermal 1 3 3 4 5 7 0 0 0 3.9 3.7 Solar PV 30 126 147 316 465 624 11 26 27 11.1 7.1 CSP 1 2 3 3 6 13 0 0 1 7.9 8.2 Marine 0 0 0 1 3 16 0 0 1 24.7 21.6 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 4 404 3 917 3 714 2 778 2 115 1 031 100 100 100 -5.0 -5.9 Coal 1 473 1 224 1 039 444 263 114 28 12 11 -11.8 -10.0 Oil 1 673 1 579 1 562 1 281 996 398 42 47 39 -4.0 -6.3 Natural gas 1 258 1 115 1 112 1 054 860 539 30 41 52 -2.3 -3.4 Power sector 1 695 1 363 1 214 662 429 239 100 100 100 -9.0 -7.5 Coal 1 131 934 780 240 105 30 64 24 13 -16.7 -14.4 Oil 85 49 49 23 14 5 4 3 2 -10.9 -10.1 Natural gas 479 379 385 399 310 210 32 72 88 -1.9 -2.8 Final consumption 2 495 2 350 2 305 1 951 1 564 737 100 100 100 -3.5 -5.3 Coal 296 236 214 169 131 68 9 8 9 -4.4 -5.3 Oil 1 471 1 436 1 421 1 184 927 366 62 59 50 -3.8 -6.3 Transport 1 049 1 100 1 090 932 745 287 47 48 39 -3.4 -6.2 Natural gas 728 678 670 598 506 302 29 32 41 -2.5 -3.7 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 366Table A.3: Energy demand – European Union 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 1 526 1 426 1 392 1 287 1 214 1 098 100 100 100 -1.2 -1.1 Coal 252 216 176 108 74 42 13 6 4 -7.5 -6.6 Oil 506 462 458 405 359 263 33 30 24 -2.2 -2.6 Natural gas 363 324 330 323 304 268 24 25 24 -0.8 -1.0 Nuclear 223 199 198 169 151 138 14 12 13 -2.4 -1.7 Hydro 32 30 28 32 33 34 2 3 3 1.6 1.1 Bioenergy 128 147 150 168 181 195 11 15 18 1.7 1.3 Other renewables 21 48 53 82 112 158 4 9 14 7.1 5.3 Power sector 647 592 572 517 494 493 100 100 100 -1.3 -0.7 Coal 187 154 122 63 33 9 21 7 2 -11.2 -11.7 Oil 23 15 14 6 4 3 3 1 1 -10.5 -7.5 Natural gas 119 94 103 108 100 90 18 20 18 -0.2 -0.6 Nuclear 223 199 198 169 151 138 35 31 28 -2.4 -1.7 Hydro 32 30 28 32 33 34 5 7 7 1.6 1.1 Bioenergy 43 56 57 64 68 75 10 14 15 1.7 1.3 Other renewables 19 45 50 76 104 144 9 21 29 6.9 5.2 Other energy sector 125 119 113 100 89 80 100 100 100 -2.2 -1.6 Electricity 39 36 35 31 30 31 31 33 39 -1.4 -0.5 Total final consumption 1 070 1 023 1 008 972 938 850 100 100 100 -0.7 -0.8 Coal 38 32 27 23 21 16 3 2 2 -2.5 -2.4 Oil 448 420 416 376 337 247 41 36 29 -1.9 -2.5 Natural gas 231 216 214 202 191 166 21 20 20 -1.0 -1.2 Electricity 216 216 211 216 224 244 21 24 29 0.5 0.7 Heat 52 46 46 45 45 43 5 5 5 -0.1 -0.3 Bioenergy 84 90 92 103 111 119 9 12 14 1.7 1.2 Other renewables 2 3 3 6 9 14 0 1 2 9.5 7.3 Industry 248 250 244 241 239 232 100 100 100 -0.2 -0.2 Coal 22 20 17 15 15 13 7 6 6 -1.2 -1.2 Oil 32 26 26 25 24 22 11 10 10 -0.5 -0.7 Natural gas 77 81 80 77 74 68 33 31 29 -0.7 -0.7 Electricity 80 82 80 82 82 82 33 34 35 0.2 0.1 Heat 16 15 15 15 14 13 6 6 6 -0.4 -0.5 Bioenergy 22 27 27 28 30 32 11 13 14 1.0 0.9 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 26.5 20.1 Transport 279 287 286 268 250 203 100 100 100 -1.2 -1.6 Oil 260 263 260 236 210 145 91 84 72 -1.9 -2.7 Electricity 5 5 5 8 13 27 2 5 13 8.8 8.5 Bioenergy 12 16 18 21 25 26 6 10 13 3.1 1.9 Other fuels 3 4 3 3 3 4 1 1 2 -1.0 0.3 Buildings 419 371 365 354 342 317 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.7 Coal 13 10 8 6 4 2 2 1 0 -5.9 -7.7 Oil 60 41 40 29 19 5 11 6 1 -6.4 -9.9 Natural gas 134 119 117 112 104 85 32 30 27 -1.1 -1.5 Electricity 127 124 121 122 125 130 33 36 41 0.3 0.3 Heat 36 31 30 31 30 30 8 9 9 -0.0 -0.1 Bioenergy 48 45 44 49 51 55 12 15 17 1.3 1.0 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 2 3 3 6 8 12 1 2 4 9.6 7.1 Other 124 114 113 109 106 98 100 100 100 -0.5 -0.7 Petrochem.
Feedstock 73 67 67 62 61 54 59 57 55 -0.8 -1.0 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 367Table A.3: Energy demand – European Union A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 1 526 1 426 1 392 1 243 1 139 979 100 100 100 -1.8 -1.7 Coal 252 216 176 73 42 27 13 4 3 -12.1 -8.5 Oil 506 462 458 377 297 137 33 26 14 -3.8 -5.6 Natural gas 363 324 330 313 253 164 24 22 17 -2.4 -3.3 Nuclear 223 199 198 167 160 164 14 14 17 -1.9 -0.9 Hydro 32 30 28 32 34 36 2 3 4 1.8 1.2 Bioenergy 128 147 150 188 211 219 11 19 22 3.2 1.8 Other renewables 21 48 53 93 141 233 4 12 24 9.3 7.3 Power sector 647 592 572 504 500 578 100 100 100 -1.2 0.1 Coal 187 154 122 32 11 9 21 2 2 -19.4 -11.6 Oil 23 15 14 7 4 1 3 1 0 -11.1 -10.5 Natural gas 119 94 103 112 86 62 18 17 11 -1.6 -2.4 Nuclear 223 199 198 167 160 164 35 32 28 -1.9 -0.9 Hydro 32 30 28 32 34 36 5 7 6 1.8 1.2 Bioenergy 43 56 57 69 79 98 10 16 17 3.0 2.6 Other renewables 19 45 50 84 127 209 9 25 36 8.9 7.1 Other energy sector 125 119 113 97 86 84 100 100 100 -2.4 -1.4 Electricity 39 36 35 35 42 79 31 49 94 1.7 4.0 Total final consumption 1 070 1 023 1 008 947 871 694 100 100 100 -1.3 -1.8 Coal 38 32 27 21 16 8 3 2 1 -5.0 -5.5 Oil 448 420 416 349 278 129 41 32 19 -3.6 -5.4 Natural gas 231 216 214 187 155 88 21 18 13 -2.9 -4.1 Electricity 216 216 211 217 229 263 21 26 38 0.8 1.1 Heat 52 46 46 44 41 35 5 5 5 -1.0 -1.2 Bioenergy 84 90 92 118 132 120 9 15 17 3.3 1.3 Other renewables 2 3 3 8 14 24 0 2 3 14.5 10.2 Industry 248 250 244 231 215 190 100 100 100 -1.1 -1.2 Coal 22 20 17 14 11 7 7 5 4 -3.7 -3.9 Oil 32 26 26 22 17 11 11 8 6 -3.6 -4.0 Natural gas 77 81 80 72 61 40 33 28 21 -2.4 -3.3 Electricity 80 82 80 80 81 84 33 37 44 0.1 0.2 Heat 16 15 15 13 12 8 6 5 4 -2.4 -3.0 Bioenergy 22 27 27 28 30 3 4 11 14 18 1.1 1.1 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 1 3 0 1 2 43.9 25.8 Transport 279 287 286 264 234 147 100 100 100 -1.8 -3.1 Oil 260 263 260 216 166 51 91 71 35 -4.0 -7.4 Electricity 5 5 5 10 20 51 2 9 35 13.6 11.8 Bioenergy 12 16 18 36 45 28 6 19 19 9.0 2.2 Other fuels 3 4 3 2 3 16 1 1 11 -2.2 7.7 Buildings 419 371 365 345 321 271 100 100 100 -1.2 -1.4 Coal 13 10 8 6 3 0 2 1 0 -8.3 -26.3 Oil 60 41 40 27 16 2 11 5 1 -7.9 -14.2 Natural gas 134 119 117 102 83 41 32 26 15 -3.1 -4.9 Electricity 127 124 121 122 123 122 33 38 45 0.1 0.0 Heat 36 31 30 30 29 27 8 9 10 -0.3 -0.6 Bioenergy 48 45 44 48 50 53 12 16 20 1.1 0.8 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 2 3 3 8 12 20 1 4 8 14.0 9.8 Other 124 114 113 107 101 87 100 100 100 -1.0 -1.2 Petrochem.
Feedstock 73 67 67 61 58 49 59 57 56 -1.2 -1.5 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 368Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – European Union 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 2 957 2 920 2 851 2 891 2 968 3 209 100 100 100 0.4 0.6 Coal 755 643 475 245 131 31 17 4 1 -11.0 -12.1 Oil 82 55 54 24 17 10 2 1 0 -9.9 -7.5 Natural gas 589 491 562 546 496 442 20 17 14 -1.1 -1.1 Nuclear 854 762 760 649 580 529 27 20 16 -2.4 -1.7 Renewables 672 964 996 1 423 1 740 2 195 35 59 68 5.2 3.8 Hydro 373 344 322 372 383 401 11 13 13 1.6 1.1 Bioenergy 129 177 182 212 224 249 6 8 8 1.9 1.5 Wind 140 321 362 572 771 1 078 13 26 34 7.1 5.3 Geothermal 6 7 7 7 9 14 0 0 0 3.0 3.6 Solar PV 22 110 118 254 341 408 4 11 13 10.1 6.1 CSP 1 5 6 6 8 18 0 0 1 3.4 5.8 Marine 0 0 1 1 4 26 0 0 1 19.2 20.5 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 804 939 960 1 066 1 160 1 309 100 100 100 1.7 1.5 Coal 166 147 146 75 42 17 15 4 1 -10.6 -9.8 Oil 56 40 40 24 18 11 4 2 1 -7.2 -6.1 Natural gas 172 185 182 188 195 214 19 17 16 0.6 0.8 Nuclear 127 114 112 101 91 82 12 8 6 -1.8 -1.4 Renewables 282 451 479 675 800 921 50 69 70 4.8 3.2 Hydro 143 151 151 154 158 164 16 14 13 0.4 0.4 Bioenergy 29 38 40 45 46 50 4 4 4 1.5 1.1 Wind 79 157 168 241 288 341 17 25 26 5.1 3.4 Geothermal 1 1 1 1 1 2 0 0 0 3.3 3.7 Solar PV 30 102 117 231 301 346 12 26 26 9.0 5.3 CSP 1 2 2 2 3 6 0 0 0 3.0 4.8 Marine 0 0 0 0 2 12 0 0 1 19.3 20.1 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 3 088 2 736 2 569 2 128 1 812 1 331 100 100 100 -3.1 -3.1 Coal 1 000 847 676 399 260 133 26 14 10 -8.3 -7.5 Oil 1 274 1 166 1 155 1 004 873 604 45 48 45 -2.5 -3.0 Natural gas 814 724 738 725 679 594 29 37 45 -0.8 -1.0 Power sector 1 155 931 811 541 392 258 100 100 100 -6.4 -5.3 Coal 801 666 526 268 143 38 65 36 15 -11.2 -11.8 Oil 73 45 44 19 13 9 5 3 3 -10.3 -7.4 Natural gas 280 220 241 254 236 212 30 60 82 -0.2 -0.6 Final consumption 1 791 1 666 1 628 1 474 1 324 991 100 100 100 -1.9 -2.3 Coal 166 141 119 103 92 73 7 7 7 -2.4 -2.3 Oil 1 114 1 051 1 041 926 812 557 64 61 56 -2.2 -2.9 Transport 788 799 791 716 638 442 49 48 45 -1.9 -2.7 Natural gas 511 473 467 445 420 362 29 32 36 -1.0 -1.2 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 369Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – European Union A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 2 957 2 920 2 851 2 932 3 155 3 970 100 100 100 0.9 1.6 Coal 755 643 475 112 34 34 17 1 1 -21.4 -11.8 Oil 82 55 54 24 14 5 2 0 0 -11.4 -10.7 Natural gas 589 491 562 618 450 319 20 14 8 -2.0 -2.7 Nuclear 854 762 760 641 615 629 27 19 16 -1.9 -0.9 Renewables 672 964 996 1 534 2 039 2 980 35 65 75 6.7 5.4 Hydro 373 344 322 375 393 413 11 12 10 1.8 1.2 Bioenergy 129 177 182 225 257 325 6 8 8 3.2 2.8 Wind 140 321 362 634 917 1 559 13 29 39 8.8 7.2 Geothermal 6 7 7 7 10 18 0 0 0 3.7 4.8 Solar PV 22 110 118 284 444 596 4 14 15 12.8 8.0 CSP 1 5 6 7 13 34 0 0 1 8.0 8.9 Marine 0 0 1 1 5 35 0 0 1 24.0 22.2 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 804 939 960 1 125 1 325 1 624 100 100 100 3.0 2.5 Coal 166 147 146 64 28 9 15 2 1 -13.9 -12.7 Oil 56 40 40 23 16 10 4 1 1 -8.0 -6.3 Natural gas 172 185 182 195 196 163 19 15 10 0.7 -0.5 Nuclear 127 114 112 102 99 95 12 7 6 -1.1 -0.8 Renewables 282 451 479 730 952 1 238 50 72 76 6.5 4.6 Hydro 143 151 151 156 162 169 16 12 10 0.6 0.5 Bioenergy 29 38 40 48 54 64 4 4 4 2.8 2.3 Wind 79 157 168 261 336 476 17 25 29 6.5 5.1 Geothermal 1 1 1 1 1 3 0 0 0 4.4 5.2 Solar PV 30 102 117 261 391 500 12 30 31 11.6 7.2 CSP 1 2 2 3 5 11 0 0 1 7.0 7.8 Marine 0 0 0 1 3 16 0 0 1 24.0 21.7 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 3 088 2 736 2 569 1 872 1 369 580 100 100 100 -5.6 -6.8 Coal 1 000 847 676 252 127 43 26 9 7 -14.1 -12.3 Oil 1 274 1 166 1 155 921 691 232 45 50 40 -4.6 -7.3 Natural gas 814 724 738 700 554 322 29 40 55 -2.6 -3.9 Power sector 1 155 931 811 423 261 141 100 100 100 -9.8 -8.0 Coal 801 666 526 138 47 9 65 18 6 -19.7 -17.8 Oil 73 45 44 21 12 4 5 5 3 -11.0 -10.5 Natural gas 280 220 241 264 201 135 30 77 95 -1.6 -2.7 Final consumption 1 791 1 666 1 628 1 346 1 034 412 100 100 100 -4.0 -6.3 Coal 166 141 119 90 63 26 7 6 6 -5.6 -7.0 Oil 1 114 1 051 1 041 846 638 210 64 62 51 -4.4 -7.3 Transport 788 799 791 656 504 156 49 49 38 -4.0 -7.4 Natural gas 511 473 467 410 333 176 29 32 43 -3.0 -4.6 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 370Table A.3: Energy demand – Africa 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 686 836 861 953 1 067 1 284 100 100 100 2.0 1.9 Coal 109 113 117 116 115 112 14 11 9 -0.1 -0.2 Oil 162 190 192 219 252 328 22 24 26 2.5 2.6 Natural gas 91 134 140 149 166 236 16 16 18 1.6 2.5 Nuclear 3 3 3 4 7 11 0 1 1 8.5 6.5 Hydro 9 11 12 16 19 28 1 2 2 4.2 4.0 Bioenergy 311 378 389 430 456 455 45 43 35 1.5 0.8 Other renewables 2 7 8 20 51 114 1 5 9 18.1 13.4 Power sector 142 176 178 188 228 312 100 100 100 2.3 2.7 Coal 66 66 65 65 62 45 37 27 14 -0.5 -1.8 Oil 17 18 19 17 16 16 11 7 5 -1.9 -0.9 Natural gas 44 70 70 67 70 91 39 31 29 0.1 1.3 Nuclear 3 3 3 4 7 11 2 3 4 8.5 6.5 Hydro 9 11 12 16 19 28 7 8 9 4.2 4.0 Bioenergy 1 1 1 2 5 12 1 2 4 14.8 11.4 Other renewables 1 7 8 19 49 109 4 22 35 18.1 13.3 Other energy sector 104 122 129 154 173 186 100 100 100 2.7 1.8 Electricity 11 14 14 15 18 24 11 10 13 2.2 2.6 Total final consumption 499 611 627 696 771 942 100 100 100 1.9 2.0 Coal 18 25 27 25 26 32 4 3 3 -0.3 0.8 Oil 138 172 173 199 232 305 28 30 32 2.7 2.7 Natural gas 30 45 51 58 69 114 8 9 12 2.9 3.9 Electricity 47 59 60 71 88 132 10 11 14 3.5 3.8 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 266 310 316 341 355 355 50 46 38 1.0 0.5 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 2 4 0 0 0 20.0 14.1 Industry 86 96 101 110 127 175 100 100 100 2.1 2.7 Coal 13 15 16 18 20 28 16 16 16 1.8 2.6 Oil 17 17 17 17 19 24 17 15 14 0.8 1.7 Natural gas 15 25 28 33 39 55 28 31 32 3.0 3.2 Electricity 21 23 23 26 31 43 23 25 25 2.9 3.0 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 21 16 16 16 17 24 16 14 14 0.8 2.0 Other renewables - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 43.7 28.6 Transport 88 124 125 142 165 213 100 100 100 2.6 2.6 Oil 86 122 123 140 162 206 98 98 97 2.5 2.5 Electricity 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 1 1 7.3 8.0 Bioenergy 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 1 1 26.2 16.7 Other fuels 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 1 1 1.3 3.3 Buildings 296 366 376 409 437 497 100 100 100 1.4 1.3 Coal 3 8 9 7 6 4 2 1 1 -3.8 -4.2 Oil 19 19 19 22 26 41 5 6 8 2.8 3.7 Natural gas 6 14 16 18 20 44 4 5 9 2.1 4.8 Electricity 24 34 35 42 52 82 9 12 17 3.8 4.2 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 242 290 297 320 332 323 79 76 65 1.0 0.4 Traditional biomass 235 279 286 303 305 268 76 70 54 0.6 -0.3 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 2 4 0 0 1 19.1 13.6 Other 29 25 26 34 42 58 100 100 100 4.4 3.9 Petrochem.
Feedstock 11 7 7 11 15 22 27 37 38 7.5 5.7 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 371Table A.3: Energy demand – Africa A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 686 836 861 763 691 823 100 100 100 -2.0 -0.2 Coal 109 113 117 96 81 56 14 12 7 -3.3 -3.5 Oil 162 190 192 212 235 253 22 34 31 1.9 1.3 Natural gas 91 134 140 151 153 144 16 22 18 0.8 0.1 Nuclear 3 3 3 4 7 22 0 1 3 8.3 9.9 Hydro 9 11 12 16 23 36 1 3 4 6.0 5.3 Bioenergy 311 378 389 257 115 131 45 17 16 -10.5 -5.0 Other renewables 2 7 8 27 77 181 1 11 22 22.6 15.9 Power sector 142 176 178 189 227 307 100 100 100 2.2 2.6 Coal 66 66 65 49 35 9 37 15 3 -5.6 -8.8 Oil 17 18 19 21 21 17 11 9 6 0.9 -0.4 Natural gas 44 70 70 71 61 33 39 27 11 -1.2 -3.4 Nuclear 3 3 3 4 7 22 2 3 7 8.3 9.9 Hydro 9 11 12 16 23 36 7 10 12 6.0 5.3 Bioenergy 1 1 1 2 7 18 1 3 6 17.9 13.7 Other renewables 1 7 8 25 72 171 4 32 56 22.3 15.8 Other energy sector 104 122 129 88 77 87 100 100 100 -4.6 -1.9 Electricity 11 14 14 15 18 24 11 24 28 2.5 2.6 Total final consumption 499 611 627 576 501 597 100 100 100 -2.0 -0.2 Coal 18 25 27 22 20 18 4 4 3 -2.5 -1.9 Oil 138 172 173 190 210 232 28 42 39 1.8 1.4 Natural gas 30 45 51 57 65 83 8 13 14 2.3 2.4 Electricity 47 59 60 74 96 145 10 19 24 4.3 4.3 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 266 310 316 230 105 109 50 21 18 -9.6 -5.0 Other renewables 0 0 0 2 4 9 0 1 2 29.3 18.8 Industry 86 96 101 104 114 141 100 100 100 1.1 1.6 Coal 13 15 16 15 15 16 16 14 12 -0.6 -0.0 Oil 17 17 17 15 16 17 17 14 12 -0.8 -0.1 Natural gas 15 25 28 32 36 47 28 32 33 2.3 2.5 Electricity 21 23 23 26 30 40 23 26 28 2.4 2.6 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 21 16 16 16 16 1 9 16 14 14 0.1 0.9 Other renewables - - 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 75.4 40.8 Transport 88 124 125 139 156 178 100 100 100 2.0 1.7 Oil 86 122 123 135 148 161 98 95 90 1.7 1.3 Electricity 0 0 0 1 1 4 0 1 2 10.7 10.8 Bioenergy 0 0 0 2 5 11 0 3 6 45.2 26.5 Other fuels 1 1 1 1 1 3 1 1 2 0.4 3.2 Buildings 296 366 376 301 193 229 100 100 100 -5.9 -2.3 Coal 3 8 9 6 4 1 2 2 1 -6.1 -8.9 Oil 19 19 19 21 24 28 5 13 12 2.3 1.8 Natural gas 6 14 16 18 20 23 4 10 10 1.9 1.7 Electricity 24 34 35 45 61 97 9 32 42 5.3 5.0 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 242 290 297 208 79 72 79 41 32 -11.3 -6.5 Traditional biomass 235 279 286 162 - - 76 - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 0 0 2 4 8 0 2 3 27.4 17.7 Other 29 25 26 32 38 49 100 100 100 3.6 3.1 Petrochem.
Feedstock 11 7 7 11 15 20 27 38 41 7.1 5.3 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 372Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Africa 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 672 837 853 972 1 196 1 773 100 100 100 3.1 3.5 Coal 259 260 259 265 256 200 30 21 11 -0.1 -1.2 Oil 64 70 72 71 65 66 8 5 4 -0.9 -0.4 Natural gas 220 334 332 345 386 547 39 32 31 1.4 2.4 Nuclear 12 12 12 14 28 44 1 2 2 8.5 6.5 Renewables 116 160 176 275 459 914 21 38 52 9.1 8.2 Hydro 110 131 141 183 221 323 17 18 18 4.2 4.0 Bioenergy 1 2 2 5 19 40 0 2 2 21.8 15.1 Wind 2 14 17 36 79 172 2 7 10 15.1 11.7 Geothermal 1 5 6 14 38 75 1 3 4 18.4 12.9 Solar PV 0 5 7 33 94 271 1 8 15 26.8 19.1 CSP - 2 3 4 8 33 0 1 2 9.1 11.9 Marine - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 155 246 255 295 373 602 100 100 100 3.5 4.2 Coal 42 49 50 51 48 41 20 13 7 -0.3 -1.0 Oil 31 43 43 35 35 37 17 9 6 -1.9 -0.8 Natural gas 52 104 110 123 132 182 43 35 30 1.7 2.4 Nuclear 2 2 2 2 4 6 1 1 1 7.5 5.2 Renewables 28 47 50 83 151 318 20 40 53 10.6 9.2 Hydro 27 36 36 44 51 77 14 14 13 3.2 3.6 Bioenergy 0 1 1 2 5 9 0 1 2 18.4 12.7 Wind 1 5 6 14 29 59 2 8 10 15.6 11.7 Geothermal 0 1 1 2 6 11 0 2 2 19.5 13.2 Solar PV 0 4 5 20 57 152 2 15 25 24.6 17.5 CSP 0 1 1 2 3 10 0 1 2 9.6 11.2 Marine - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12.1 6.1 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 025 1 241 1 275 1 344 1 458 1 785 100 100 100 1.2 1.6 Coal 387 411 422 419 411 373 33 28 21 -0.2 -0.6 Oil 453 558 563 620 708 920 44 49 52 2.1 2.4 Natural gas 184 272 290 304 340 492 23 23 28 1.4 2.5 Power sector 420 483 483 467 458 442 100 100 100 -0.5 -0.4 Coal 263 259 258 258 244 178 53 53 40 -0.5 -1.8 Oil 54 59 61 54 50 50 13 11 11 -1.9 -0.9 Natural gas 103 164 163 156 165 214 34 36 48 0.1 1.3 Final consumption 503 660 688 761 874 1 197 100 100 100 2.2 2.7 Coal 68 96 104 101 105 127 15 12 11 0.1 0.9 Oil 385 488 491 553 642 852 71 73 71 2.5 2.7 Transport 259 367 369 421 486 618 54 56 52 2.5 2.5 Natural gas 51 76 92 107 127 218 13 15 18 3.0 4.2 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 373Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Africa A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 672 837 853 1 023 1 301 1 930 100 100 100 3.9 4.0 Coal 259 260 259 205 147 41 30 11 2 -5.0 -8.4 Oil 64 70 72 76 75 57 8 6 3 0.3 -1.1 Natural gas 220 334 332 374 347 213 39 27 11 0.4 -2.1 Nuclear 12 12 12 14 28 84 1 2 4 8.3 9.9 Renewables 116 160 176 353 703 1 534 21 54 79 13.4 10.9 Hydro 110 131 141 192 266 419 17 20 22 6.0 5.3 Bioenergy 1 2 2 8 25 62 0 2 3 25.2 17.4 Wind 2 14 17 66 136 267 2 10 14 20.9 14.1 Geothermal 1 5 6 14 43 87 1 3 5 19.8 13.7 Solar PV 0 5 7 65 204 595 1 16 31 36.0 23.6 CSP - 2 3 9 28 102 0 2 5 22.0 18.1 Marine - - - 0 0 1 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 155 246 255 335 477 850 100 100 100 5.9 5.9 Coal 42 49 50 49 40 21 20 8 2 -1.9 -4.1 Oil 31 43 43 40 41 43 17 9 5 -0.6 -0.0 Natural gas 52 104 110 124 130 138 43 27 16 1.5 1.1 Nuclear 2 2 2 2 4 12 1 1 1 7.5 8.8 Renewables 28 47 50 120 259 596 20 54 70 16.2 12.5 Hydro 27 36 36 46 63 108 14 13 13 5.2 5.3 Bioenergy 0 1 1 2 6 14 0 1 2 21.3 14.8 Wind 1 5 6 25 48 90 2 10 11 21.2 13.9 Geothermal 0 1 1 2 7 13 0 1 2 21.0 14.1 Solar PV 0 4 5 41 124 340 2 26 40 33.7 22.1 CSP 0 1 1 3 9 31 0 2 4 22.0 17.5 Marine - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 43.9 34.5 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 025 1 241 1 275 1 258 1 239 1 106 100 100 100 -0.3 -0.7 Coal 387 411 422 342 275 154 33 22 14 -3.8 -4.7 Oil 453 558 563 607 661 696 44 53 63 1.5 1.0 Natural gas 184 272 290 309 304 264 23 25 24 0.4 -0.5 Power sector 420 483 483 428 348 164 100 100 100 -2.9 -5.0 Coal 263 259 258 194 137 30 53 39 18 -5.6 -9.7 Oil 54 59 61 66 67 56 13 19 34 0.9 -0.5 Natural gas 103 164 163 168 144 78 34 41 48 -1.2 -3.4 Final consumption 503 660 688 722 776 839 100 100 100 1.1 0.9 Coal 68 96 104 88 79 62 15 10 7 -2.6 -2.5 Oil 385 488 491 529 580 631 71 75 75 1.5 1.2 Transport 259 367 369 406 446 484 54 57 58 1.7 1.3 Natural gas 51 76 92 105 118 147 13 15 17 2.3 2.2 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 374Table A.3: Energy demand – South Africa 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 135 135 137 136 136 142 100 100 100 -0.0 0.2 Coal 101 98 100 94 85 67 73 62 47 -1.5 -1.9 Oil 18 20 21 23 25 32 15 19 23 1.9 2.1 Natural gas 4 4 4 5 5 8 3 4 6 2.7 3.2 Nuclear 3 3 3 4 4 6 2 3 5 1.8 3.6 Hydro 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6.4 6.4 Bioenergy 9 8 8 8 10 14 6 8 10 2.6 2.9 Other renewables 0 1 1 2 6 14 1 4 10 14.3 11.5 Power sector 65 61 60 59 56 55 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.4 Coal 61 57 56 52 44 29 92 79 52 -2.0 -3.1 Oil 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3.5 1.8 Natural gas - - - 0 1 3 - 2 5 n.a.
Nuclear 3 3 3 4 4 6 5 7 12 1.8 3.6 Hydro 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 6.4 6.4 Bioenergy 0 0 0 0 2 4 0 3 8 26.3 17.4 Other renewables 0 1 1 2 5 13 2 10 23 14.2 11.6 Other energy sector 29 23 24 25 26 29 100 100 100 0.7 0.8 Electricity 4 3 3 3 4 4 13 14 15 1.1 1.4 Total final consumption 63 71 73 75 78 88 100 100 100 0.6 0.9 Coal 15 18 20 17 16 14 27 20 16 -1.9 -1.5 Oil 22 27 28 30 32 37 38 41 42 1.2 1.3 Natural gas 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 1.5 1.8 Electricity 17 18 17 19 21 26 24 27 29 1.8 1.9 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 7 6 6 6 6 7 8 8 8 0.7 1.1 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 14.8 11.0 Industry 26 24 25 26 27 31 100 100 100 0.9 1.0 Coal 11 9 9 10 10 11 37 36 34 0.6 0.6 Oil 1 2 2 2 2 2 7 6 6 -0.3 0.2 Natural gas 1 2 2 2 2 3 8 8 8 0.7 1.3 Electricity 10 9 9 10 10 11 37 38 37 1.1 1.0 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 2 3 3 3 3 4 11 12 14 1.9 2.3 Other renewables - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 45.9 31.6 Transport 16 19 20 21 23 29 100 100 100 1.5 1.9 Oil 16 19 19 20 22 28 99 97 94 1.3 1.7 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 2 3.1 4.3 Bioenergy - - - 0 0 1 - 2 4 n.a.
Other fuels 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 29.9 29.9 Buildings 15 21 21 20 20 20 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.1 Coal 3 8 9 7 6 3 41 28 17 -3.9 -4.3 Oil 1 2 2 1 1 1 8 6 5 -2.8 -2.1 Natural gas 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 9.8 7.1 Electricity 6 8 7 9 10 13 36 50 63 2.4 2.6 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 4 3 3 3 3 2 15 13 9 -1.9 -2.4 Traditional biomass 4 3 3 3 2 1 15 11 6 -3.0 -4.0 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 3 5 13.7 10.2 Other 6 7 7 8 8 8 100 100 100 0.7 0.2 Petrochem.
Feedstock 1 1 1 1 1 2 17 18 20 1.3 1.0 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 375Table A.3: Energy demand – South Africa A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 135 135 137 123 114 107 100 100 100 -1.6 -1.1 Coal 101 98 100 82 66 35 73 58 33 -3.7 -4.8 Oil 18 20 21 20 21 22 15 18 20 0.1 0.2 Natural gas 4 4 4 5 5 6 3 4 6 1.9 2.0 Nuclear 3 3 3 4 4 12 2 3 11 1.8 6.9 Hydro 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7.1 6.6 Bioenergy 9 8 8 7 8 13 6 7 12 0.1 2.3 Other renewables 0 1 1 5 11 19 1 9 18 20.2 13.3 Power sector 65 61 60 52 46 40 100 100 100 -2.4 -1.9 Coal 61 57 56 43 30 5 92 65 13 -5.5 -10.8 Oil 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3.5 1.8 Natural gas - - - 0 1 1 - 1 2 n.a.
Nuclear 3 3 3 4 4 12 5 8 30 1.8 6.9 Hydro 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 7.1 6.6 Bioenergy 0 0 0 0 2 4 0 5 11 27.9 17.6 Other renewables 0 1 1 5 10 17 2 21 42 20.3 13.3 Other energy sector 29 23 24 24 25 27 100 100 100 0.1 0.4 Electricity 4 3 3 3 3 3 13 12 12 -0.4 0.2 Total final consumption 63 71 73 69 66 66 100 100 100 -0.9 -0.5 Coal 15 18 20 15 12 7 27 18 11 -4.3 -4.7 Oil 22 27 28 28 27 26 38 41 40 -0.3 -0.2 Natural gas 1 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 0.5 0.1 Electricity 17 18 17 19 20 22 24 30 34 1.1 1.1 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 7 6 6 5 4 6 8 6 9 -3.1 0.0 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 1 3 19.0 13.3 Industry 26 24 25 23 22 21 100 100 100 -1.0 -0.9 Coal 11 9 9 8 7 6 37 33 28 -2.1 -2.2 Oil 1 2 2 1 1 1 7 6 5 -3.4 -3.0 Natural gas 1 2 2 2 2 2 8 8 8 -0.4 -0.8 Electricity 10 9 9 9 9 9 37 41 43 -0.1 -0.1 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 2 3 3 3 3 3 11 12 15 -0.1 0.5 Other renewables - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 61.0 39.8 Transport 16 19 20 20 21 23 100 100 100 0.7 0.9 Oil 16 19 19 20 20 20 99 93 87 0.2 0.3 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 3 3.6 5.3 Bioenergy - - - 1 1 2 - 5 9 n.a.
Other fuels 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 41.5 33.4 Buildings 15 21 21 18 16 16 100 100 100 -2.3 -1.4 Coal 3 8 9 6 4 1 41 27 8 -6.1 -8.9 Oil 1 2 2 1 1 1 8 6 3 -4.9 -5.2 Natural gas 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 8.0 4.5 Electricity 6 8 7 9 10 12 36 59 75 2.3 2.1 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 4 3 3 2 0 1 15 3 4 -16.5 -6.9 Traditional biomass 4 3 3 2 - - 15 - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 5 10 17.7 12.1 Other 6 7 7 7 7 6 100 100 100 -1.1 -1.1 Petrochem.
Feedstock 1 1 1 1 1 1 17 21 23 1.0 0.5 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 376Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – South Africa 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 257 251 248 256 278 328 100 100 100 1.1 1.3 Coal 242 227 223 218 190 134 90 68 41 -1.5 -2.4 Oil 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3.7 1.9 Natural gas - - - 2 6 18 - 2 6 n.a.
Nuclear 12 12 12 14 14 25 5 5 7 1.8 3.6 Renewables 2 12 13 21 69 151 5 25 46 16.3 12.4 Hydro 2 1 1 1 2 4 0 1 1 6.4 6.4 Bioenergy 0 0 0 1 7 16 0 3 5 28.1 18.3 Wind 0 6 7 11 38 81 3 14 25 17.2 12.7 Geothermal - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV - 3 3 6 20 41 1 7 13 17.8 12.8 CSP - 1 2 2 2 8 1 1 3 -0.0 8.3 Marine - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 46 56 57 60 74 103 100 100 100 2.3 2.8 Coal 39 42 43 41 34 26 74 47 25 -2.0 -2.3 Oil 3 4 4 3 3 3 7 4 3 -1.8 -0.9 Natural gas 0 1 1 2 4 10 1 5 10 18.5 14.1 Nuclear 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 0.0 2.6 Renewables 2 8 8 12 29 54 15 39 52 11.9 9.3 Hydro 2 4 4 4 4 4 6 5 4 0.6 0.9 Bioenergy 0 0 0 0 2 4 0 3 4 19.3 13.3 Wind 0 2 2 3 12 22 4 16 21 16.7 11.8 Geothermal - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV 0 2 2 4 11 21 3 15 20 17.7 12.3 CSP - 0 1 1 1 3 1 1 3 1.7 8.2 Marine - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 420 428 433 416 387 340 100 100 100 -1.0 -1.1 Coal 357 350 353 334 299 230 82 77 68 -1.5 -2.0 Oil 61 73 75 76 81 97 17 21 29 0.8 1.2 Natural gas 2 5 5 5 7 13 1 2 4 4.1 5.0 Power sector 243 224 220 208 178 120 100 100 100 -1.9 -2.8 Coal 243 224 220 207 176 113 100 99 95 -2.0 -3.1 Oil 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3.5 1.8 Natural gas - - - 1 2 6 - 1 5 n.a.
Final consumption 118 146 152 147 149 160 100 100 100 -0.2 0.2 Coal 58 70 74 68 64 58 49 43 36 -1.3 -1.2 Oil 58 71 73 74 79 95 48 53 60 0.8 1.3 Transport 46 57 58 61 67 83 38 45 52 1.3 1.7 Natural gas 2 5 5 5 5 6 3 3 4 0.9 1.6 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 377Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – South Africa A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 257 251 248 248 256 275 100 100 100 0.3 0.5 Coal 242 227 223 181 129 22 90 50 8 -4.9 -10.4 Oil 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3.7 1.9 Natural gas - - - 2 3 7 - 1 2 n.a.
Nuclear 12 12 12 14 14 47 5 6 17 1.8 6.9 Renewables 2 12 13 51 110 199 5 43 72 21.4 13.9 Hydro 2 1 1 2 2 4 0 1 2 7.1 6.6 Bioenergy 0 0 0 2 8 17 0 3 6 29.8 18.6 Wind 0 6 7 32 62 107 3 24 39 22.5 14.2 Geothermal - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV - 3 3 11 30 60 1 12 22 22.4 14.9 CSP - 1 2 4 7 11 1 3 4 14.9 9.8 Marine - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 46 56 57 71 84 107 100 100 100 3.5 3.0 Coal 39 42 43 41 32 12 74 38 11 -2.5 -5.9 Oil 3 4 4 3 3 3 7 4 3 -1.8 -0.9 Natural gas 0 1 1 1 2 3 1 2 3 9.8 7.8 Nuclear 2 2 2 2 2 7 3 2 6 0.0 6.1 Renewables 2 8 8 23 43 71 15 51 66 16.1 10.8 Hydro 2 4 4 4 4 4 6 5 4 0.5 0.9 Bioenergy 0 0 0 1 2 4 0 3 4 20.7 13.5 Wind 0 2 2 10 18 29 4 22 27 21.6 13.3 Geothermal - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV 0 2 2 7 17 30 3 20 28 22.2 14.3 CSP - 0 1 2 2 4 1 3 3 15.7 9.8 Marine - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 420 428 433 364 301 174 100 100 100 -3.3 -4.2 Coal 357 350 353 287 224 98 82 74 56 -4.1 -5.9 Oil 61 73 75 72 71 70 17 24 40 -0.5 -0.3 Natural gas 2 5 5 5 6 7 1 2 4 1.9 1.7 Power sector 243 224 220 171 120 15 100 100 100 -5.4 -11.9 Coal 243 224 220 170 118 13 100 99 83 -5.5 -12.7 Oil 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3.5 1.8 Natural gas - - - 1 1 2 - 1 15 n.a.
Final consumption 118 146 152 134 122 101 100 100 100 -2.0 -1.9 Coal 58 70 74 59 48 29 49 40 28 -3.8 -4.5 Oil 58 71 73 71 69 68 48 57 68 -0.5 -0.3 Transport 46 57 58 59 59 61 38 49 61 0.2 0.3 Natural gas 2 5 5 4 4 4 3 4 4 -0.3 -0.6 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 378Table A.3: Energy demand – Middle East 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 627 782 797 861 959 1 166 100 100 100 1.7 1.8 Coal 2 4 4 6 6 8 0 1 1 5.0 3.8 Oil 298 322 324 337 366 430 41 38 37 1.1 1.4 Natural gas 324 451 464 497 551 648 58 57 56 1.6 1.6 Nuclear - 2 2 11 13 20 0 1 2 18.5 11.6 Hydro 2 2 2 2 2 3 0 0 0 3.4 3.0 Bioenergy 1 1 1 2 4 11 0 0 1 13.8 11.9 Other renewables 0 1 1 7 16 46 0 2 4 26.4 18.8 Power sector 214 261 261 263 282 344 100 100 100 0.7 1.3 Coal 0 0 0 2 3 5 0 1 1 23.8 14.3 Oil 83 69 73 72 61 54 28 22 16 -1.5 -1.4 Natural gas 129 187 184 171 190 222 70 67 64 0.3 0.9 Nuclear - 2 2 11 13 20 1 5 6 18.5 11.6 Hydro 2 2 2 2 2 3 1 1 1 3.4 3.0 Bioenergy 0 0 0 1 2 7 0 1 2 59.6 35.7 Other renewables 0 0 1 4 11 35 0 4 10 26.0 19.4 Other energy sector 50 80 83 103 116 135 100 100 100 3.1 2.3 Electricity 14 20 20 22 25 31 24 22 23 2.0 2.1 Total final consumption 436 545 557 607 691 860 100 100 100 2.0 2.1 Coal 1 3 3 3 3 3 1 0 0 -0.9 -0.4 Oil 211 246 244 258 292 357 44 42 42 1.6 1.8 Natural gas 163 212 225 253 284 343 40 41 40 2.2 2.0 Electricity 59 83 84 89 104 141 15 15 16 2.0 2.5 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 1 1 1 1 2 4 0 0 0 8.4 7.2 Other renewables 0 0 0 3 6 12 0 1 1 27.2 17.3 Industry 131 152 160 170 182 215 100 100 100 1.2 1.4 Coal 1 3 3 3 2 3 2 1 1 -0.9 -0.3 Oil 34 19 20 18 17 17 12 9 8 -1.3 -0.7 Natural gas 83 112 120 131 142 170 75 78 79 1.5 1.7 Electricity 13 18 18 19 20 23 11 11 11 1.1 1.3 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy - - - 0 1 1 - 0 1 n.a.
Other renewables 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 32.4 20.7 Transport 116 141 141 147 162 196 100 100 100 1.3 1.6 Oil 111 134 133 138 153 184 95 94 94 1.2 1.6 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 15.8 13.6 Bioenergy - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other fuels 5 7 7 9 9 11 5 6 6 1.6 2.0 Buildings 125 155 160 176 212 278 100 100 100 2.6 2.7 Coal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -1.7 -1.6 Oil 22 17 17 16 16 15 11 7 6 -0.8 -0.5 Natural gas 59 75 80 91 110 137 50 52 49 3.0 2.6 Electricity 44 61 62 66 79 113 39 37 41 2.3 2.9 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 5.4 4.7 Traditional biomass 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1.4 1.1 Other renewables 0 0 0 2 5 11 0 3 4 26.4 16.9 Other 63 97 97 114 135 171 100 100 100 3.1 2.8 Petrochem.
Feedstock 45 76 76 93 113 147 79 84 86 3.7 3.2 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 379Table A.3: Energy demand – Middle East A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 627 782 797 776 806 924 100 100 100 0.1 0.7 Coal 2 4 4 5 4 3 0 1 0 1.3 -0.5 Oil 298 322 324 298 288 290 41 36 31 -1.0 -0.5 Natural gas 324 451 464 437 443 417 58 55 45 -0.4 -0.5 Nuclear - 2 2 10 11 35 0 1 4 16.4 14.6 Hydro 2 2 2 3 3 4 0 0 0 5.7 4.1 Bioenergy 1 1 1 4 7 16 0 1 2 20.0 14.0 Other renewables 0 1 1 19 50 160 0 6 17 39.8 26.0 Power sector 214 261 261 218 224 298 100 100 100 -1.4 0.6 Coal 0 0 0 2 2 2 0 1 1 20.3 9.9 Oil 83 69 73 48 27 15 28 12 5 -8.6 -7.3 Natural gas 129 187 184 144 146 111 70 65 37 -2.1 -2.4 Nuclear - 2 2 10 11 35 1 5 12 16.4 14.6 Hydro 2 2 2 3 3 4 1 1 1 5.7 4.1 Bioenergy 0 0 0 1 4 9 0 2 3 69.9 37.3 Other renewables 0 0 1 10 32 123 0 14 41 39.2 26.8 Other energy sector 50 80 83 84 88 107 100 100 100 0.5 1.2 Electricity 14 20 20 20 22 32 24 26 30 0.9 2.3 Total final consumption 436 545 557 577 615 691 100 100 100 0.9 1.0 Coal 1 3 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 -5.5 -5.7 Oil 211 246 244 246 256 270 44 42 39 0.4 0.5 Natural gas 163 212 225 235 236 224 40 38 32 0.4 -0.0 Electricity 59 83 84 83 98 143 15 16 21 1.5 2.6 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 1 1 1 2 3 7 0 1 1 13.5 10.5 Other renewables 0 0 0 10 18 37 0 3 5 41.0 23.9 Industry 131 152 160 159 161 169 100 100 100 0.1 0.3 Coal 1 3 3 2 1 1 2 1 0 -6.2 -6.8 Oil 34 19 20 15 11 8 12 7 5 -5.4 -4.2 Natural gas 83 112 120 124 128 130 75 79 77 0.6 0.4 Electricity 13 18 18 18 20 26 11 12 15 1.1 1.8 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy - - - 0 1 3 - 1 2 n.a.
Other renewables 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 50.1 35.7 Transport 116 141 141 142 140 137 100 100 100 -0.1 -0.1 Oil 111 134 133 132 130 117 95 93 85 -0.3 -0.6 Electricity 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 1 2 32.4 22.6 Bioenergy - - - 1 1 2 - 1 1 n.a.
Other fuels 5 7 7 9 8 15 5 6 11 0.8 3.5 Buildings 125 155 160 166 185 224 100 100 100 1.3 1.6 Coal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -5.3 -10.5 Oil 22 17 17 15 14 11 11 8 5 -1.5 -1.9 Natural gas 59 75 80 80 78 67 50 42 30 -0.1 -0.8 Electricity 44 61 62 60 73 110 39 40 49 1.6 2.8 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 4.4 4.5 Traditional biomass 0 0 0 0 - - 0 - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 0 0 9 17 34 0 9 15 40.6 23.5 Other 63 97 97 111 129 161 100 100 100 2.7 2.5 Petrochem.
Feedstock 45 76 76 91 109 141 79 85 88 3.3 3.0 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 380Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Middle East 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 829 1 159 1 162 1 277 1 481 1 989 100 100 100 2.2 2.6 Coal 0 1 1 11 14 23 0 1 1 31.0 17.8 Oil 284 293 307 310 272 240 26 18 12 -1.1 -1.2 Natural gas 527 835 819 846 1 004 1 248 71 68 63 1.9 2.0 Nuclear - 8 8 41 49 76 1 3 4 18.5 11.6 Renewables 18 24 28 69 141 402 2 10 20 15.9 13.6 Hydro 18 19 19 24 27 35 2 2 2 3.4 3.0 Bioenergy 0 0 0 2 7 24 0 0 1 59.2 35.5 Wind 0 1 2 8 25 96 0 2 5 26.4 20.5 Geothermal - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV 0 3 7 33 72 208 1 5 10 24.3 17.9 CSP - 0 0 3 10 38 0 1 2 34.4 24.3 Marine - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 226 330 343 411 469 614 100 100 100 2.9 2.8 Coal 0 0 0 3 3 5 0 1 1 24.4 14.7 Oil 69 96 96 95 83 73 28 18 12 -1.3 -1.3 Natural gas 143 213 224 267 302 345 65 64 56 2.7 2.1 Nuclear - 1 1 7 9 13 0 2 2 21.7 13.0 Renewables 13 19 22 39 70 174 6 15 28 11.3 10.4 Hydro 13 17 17 17 19 23 5 4 4 1.2 1.5 Bioenergy 0 0 0 0 1 4 0 0 1 44.8 28.5 Wind 0 1 1 3 9 33 0 2 5 24.5 19.3 Geothermal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6.6 4.5 Solar PV 0 2 4 18 37 101 1 8 16 22.9 16.9 CSP - 0 0 1 4 13 0 1 2 30.0 21.7 Marine - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 493 1 773 1 872 1 933 2 072 2 371 100 100 100 0.9 1.1 Coal 6 15 14 21 24 31 1 1 1 5.2 3.9 Oil 810 835 856 853 864 933 46 42 39 0.1 0.4 Natural gas 677 923 1 002 1 059 1 184 1 408 54 57 59 1.5 1.6 Power sector 565 660 660 636 650 709 100 100 100 -0.1 0.3 Coal 1 2 1 10 12 19 0 2 3 23.8 14.3 Oil 261 217 227 224 192 168 34 30 24 -1.5 -1.4 Natural gas 303 440 432 402 446 521 65 69 74 0.3 0.9 Final consumption 825 970 1 063 1 111 1 218 1 439 100 100 100 1.2 1.5 Coal 4 11 11 11 10 11 1 1 1 -0.8 -0.3 Oil 515 571 583 579 616 707 55 51 49 0.5 0.9 Transport 331 400 398 412 455 550 37 37 38 1.2 1.6 Natural gas 306 388 469 521 592 721 44 49 50 2.1 2.1 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 381Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Middle East A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 829 1 159 1 162 1 185 1 388 2 018 100 100 100 1.6 2.7 Coal 0 1 1 9 10 10 0 1 0 27.2 13.2 Oil 284 293 307 209 119 61 26 9 3 -8.3 -7.4 Natural gas 527 835 819 791 842 667 71 61 33 0.3 -1.0 Nuclear - 8 8 38 40 133 1 3 7 16.4 14.6 Renewables 18 24 28 137 377 1 148 2 27 57 26.7 19.4 Hydro 18 19 19 30 35 44 2 3 2 5.7 4.1 Bioenergy 0 0 0 5 13 31 0 1 2 69.6 37.2 Wind 0 1 2 18 137 430 0 10 21 47.4 29.4 Geothermal - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV 0 3 7 78 165 409 1 12 20 34.0 21.7 CSP - 0 0 6 26 234 0 2 12 46.2 35.4 Marine - - - 0 0 1 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 226 330 343 439 529 824 100 100 100 4.0 4.3 Coal 0 0 0 3 3 3 0 1 0 22.4 11.1 Oil 69 96 96 93 77 72 28 15 9 -1.9 -1.3 Natural gas 143 213 224 262 269 264 65 51 32 1.7 0.8 Nuclear - 1 1 7 9 18 0 2 2 22.4 14.8 Renewables 13 19 22 75 170 466 6 32 57 20.6 15.7 Hydro 13 17 17 21 23 27 5 4 3 2.9 2.4 Bioenergy 0 0 0 1 2 6 0 0 1 54.2 30.9 Wind 0 1 1 9 50 144 0 9 18 45.5 28.0 Geothermal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 11.6 5.9 Solar PV 0 2 4 42 84 204 1 16 25 32.4 20.9 CSP - 0 0 2 10 84 0 2 10 41.4 32.8 Marine - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 493 1 773 1 872 1 666 1 554 1 284 100 100 100 -1.7 -1.8 Coal 6 15 14 18 15 11 1 1 1 0.9 -1.2 Oil 810 835 856 732 624 500 46 40 39 -2.8 -2.5 Natural gas 677 923 1 002 917 915 774 54 59 60 -0.8 -1.2 Power sector 565 660 660 497 436 306 100 100 100 -3.7 -3.6 Coal 1 2 1 8 9 8 0 2 3 20.3 9.9 Oil 261 217 227 152 85 46 34 19 15 -8.6 -7.3 Natural gas 303 440 432 337 343 252 65 79 82 -2.1 -2.5 Final consumption 825 970 1 063 1 023 979 848 100 100 100 -0.7 -1.1 Coal 4 11 11 8 6 2 1 1 0 -6.3 -7.4 Oil 515 571 583 537 500 427 55 51 50 -1.4 -1.5 Transport 331 400 398 394 387 348 37 40 41 -0.3 -0.6 Natural gas 306 388 469 478 473 418 44 48 49 0.1 -0.5 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 382Table A.3: Energy demand – Eurasia 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 841 938 931 938 966 1 027 100 100 100 0.3 0.5 Coal 138 162 158 146 144 139 17 15 14 -0.8 -0.6 Oil 153 184 188 187 193 194 20 20 19 0.2 0.2 Natural gas 477 507 501 516 526 552 54 54 54 0.4 0.5 Nuclear 45 54 53 54 58 68 6 6 7 0.8 1.2 Hydro 19 22 22 23 24 27 2 3 3 1.0 1.0 Bioenergy 7 9 10 11 13 22 1 1 2 2.6 3.9 Other renewables 0 0 0 2 9 25 0 1 2 32.5 22.0 Power sector 420 415 417 410 418 458 100 100 100 0.0 0.4 Coal 90 90 89 80 77 72 21 18 16 -1.3 -1.0 Oil 12 8 9 8 7 6 2 2 1 -2.5 -2.2 Natural gas 249 236 240 239 238 248 57 57 54 -0.1 0.2 Nuclear 45 54 53 54 58 68 13 14 15 0.8 1.2 Hydro 19 22 22 23 24 27 5 6 6 1.0 1.0 Bioenergy 4 4 4 5 6 13 1 2 3 3.1 5.4 Other renewables 0 0 0 2 8 24 0 2 5 32.6 22.2 Other energy sector 143 161 159 153 152 147 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.4 Electricity 30 34 34 33 33 36 22 22 24 -0.3 0.2 Total final consumption 541 623 617 646 678 721 100 100 100 0.9 0.7 Coal 30 40 38 39 41 45 6 6 6 0.8 0.8 Oil 120 152 155 157 165 169 25 24 23 0.6 0.4 Natural gas 188 226 217 230 240 256 35 35 36 0.9 0.8 Electricity 75 83 85 92 98 113 14 15 16 1.3 1.4 Heat 125 118 118 122 126 128 19 19 18 0.6 0.4 Bioenergy 3 4 5 6 6 8 1 1 1 2.3 2.2 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 30.3 19.4 Industry 158 165 162 177 190 208 100 100 100 1.5 1.2 Coal 21 31 29 32 35 41 18 19 20 1.7 1.7 Oil 13 10 10 12 13 13 6 7 6 1.8 1.1 Natural gas 43 46 44 49 53 58 27 28 28 1.6 1.3 Electricity 34 37 37 39 41 44 23 22 21 0.9 0.8 Heat 48 39 38 43 45 48 24 24 23 1.5 1.0 Bioenergy 0 2 2 2 3 4 1 1 2 2.5 2.5 Other renewables - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 55.1 32.3 Transport 112 123 124 128 134 144 100 100 100 0.7 0.7 Oil 69 78 79 81 85 89 64 63 62 0.6 0.5 Electricity 8 8 8 9 10 13 6 7 9 2.2 2.4 Bioenergy 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 74.2 39.7 Other fuels 36 38 37 38 39 42 30 29 29 0.6 0.7 Buildings 202 242 240 246 252 261 100 100 100 0.4 0.4 Coal 9 9 8 7 6 4 4 2 2 -3.3 -3.4 Oil 12 25 25 25 25 24 10 10 9 0.1 -0.3 Natural gas 75 96 93 96 99 102 39 39 39 0.5 0.4 Electricity 30 35 36 39 42 49 15 17 19 1.5 1.5 Heat 74 75 75 76 77 78 31 31 30 0.2 0.2 Bioenergy 2 3 3 3 3 4 1 1 1 1.5 1.5 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 27.1 17.6 Other 68 93 92 95 102 109 100 100 100 0.9 0.8 Petrochem.
Feedstock 61 31 32 31 35 38 35 35 35 1.0 0.8 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 383Table A.3: Energy demand – Eurasia A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 841 938 931 911 884 829 100 100 100 -0.5 -0.6 Coal 138 162 158 116 87 48 17 10 6 -5.3 -5.5 Oil 153 184 188 179 173 147 20 20 18 -0.7 -1.2 Natural gas 477 507 501 518 493 418 54 56 50 -0.1 -0.9 Nuclear 45 54 53 54 64 81 6 7 10 1.8 2.0 Hydro 19 22 22 25 29 37 2 3 4 2.7 2.5 Bioenergy 7 9 10 12 19 51 1 2 6 6.3 8.3 Other renewables 0 0 0 7 18 47 0 2 6 41.8 25.7 Power sector 420 415 417 406 390 388 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.4 Coal 90 90 89 56 34 10 21 9 3 -8.3 -9.8 Oil 12 8 9 8 6 4 2 2 1 -3.2 -3.5 Natural gas 249 236 240 249 227 168 57 58 43 -0.5 -1.7 Nuclear 45 54 53 54 64 81 13 16 21 1.8 2.0 Hydro 19 22 22 25 29 37 5 7 10 2.7 2.5 Bioenergy 4 4 4 6 12 43 1 3 11 9.5 11.3 Other renewables 0 0 0 7 17 44 0 4 11 42.1 25.7 Other energy sector 143 161 159 150 140 116 100 100 100 -1.2 -1.5 Electricity 30 34 34 33 30 26 22 22 22 -1.1 -1.3 Total final consumption 541 623 617 613 605 560 100 100 100 -0.2 -0.5 Coal 30 40 38 34 30 23 6 5 4 -2.0 -2.4 Oil 120 152 155 150 148 128 25 24 23 -0.4 -0.9 Natural gas 188 226 217 221 218 198 35 36 35 0.0 -0.4 Electricity 75 83 85 88 92 100 14 15 18 0.7 0.8 Heat 125 118 118 114 108 94 19 18 17 -0.8 -1.1 Bioenergy 3 4 5 6 6 8 1 1 1 2.5 2.4 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 1 38.4 26.1 Industry 158 165 162 163 161 148 100 100 100 -0.1 -0.4 Coal 21 31 29 28 26 22 18 16 15 -0.9 -1.3 Oil 13 10 10 10 10 9 6 6 6 -0.2 -0.6 Natural gas 43 46 44 46 46 42 27 28 28 0.3 -0.3 Electricity 34 37 37 37 38 37 23 24 25 0.1 0.0 Heat 48 39 38 39 38 32 24 23 22 -0.2 -0.8 Bioenergy 0 2 2 3 3 4 1 2 3 3.1 2.9 Other renewables - - 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 77.2 45.5 Transport 112 123 124 122 118 106 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.7 Oil 69 78 79 79 76 64 64 64 60 -0.4 -1.0 Electricity 8 8 8 9 10 14 6 9 14 2.4 3.0 Bioenergy 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 82.7 43.2 Other fuels 36 38 37 35 32 28 30 27 26 -1.2 -1.3 Buildings 202 242 240 234 228 205 100 100 100 -0.5 -0.8 Coal 9 9 8 6 4 0 4 2 0 -6.4 -12.7 Oil 12 25 25 23 21 15 10 9 7 -1.5 -2.5 Natural gas 75 96 93 93 91 78 39 40 38 -0.2 -0.9 Electricity 30 35 36 38 39 43 15 17 21 0.8 0.9 Heat 74 75 75 71 68 60 31 30 29 -1.0 -1.1 Bioenergy 2 3 3 3 3 4 1 1 2 1.7 1.7 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 1 32.4 22.6 Other 68 93 92 93 98 101 100 100 100 0.6 0.5 Petrochem.
Feedstock 61 31 32 31 34 35 35 35 34 0.6 0.4 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 384Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Eurasia 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 1 251 1 387 1 410 1 479 1 561 1 759 100 100 100 0.9 1.1 Coal 235 257 252 232 227 220 18 15 13 -0.9 -0.6 Oil 11 9 12 6 4 2 1 0 0 -9.5 -9.0 Natural gas 603 655 682 746 774 827 48 50 47 1.2 0.9 Nuclear 173 207 202 206 221 261 14 14 15 0.8 1.2 Renewables 229 259 262 289 334 449 19 21 26 2.2 2.6 Hydro 226 254 255 267 284 315 18 18 18 1.0 1.0 Bioenergy 3 3 3 4 10 35 0 1 2 9.6 11.6 Wind 0 1 1 12 28 70 0 2 4 36.4 22.8 Geothermal 1 0 0 1 6 21 0 0 1 27.6 20.3 Solar PV - 1 2 5 6 9 0 0 0 10.7 7.1 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 285 333 340 359 373 414 100 100 100 0.9 1.0 Coal 64 67 67 60 52 46 20 14 11 -2.2 -1.8 Oil 9 9 9 6 3 1 3 1 0 -10.6 -10.4 Natural gas 122 153 156 175 181 193 46 48 46 1.3 1.0 Nuclear 25 30 31 30 33 36 9 9 9 0.6 0.8 Renewables 66 74 76 88 102 135 22 27 33 2.7 2.8 Hydro 64 71 72 76 80 89 21 22 21 1.0 1.0 Bioenergy 1 2 2 2 3 9 0 1 2 6.0 8.1 Wind 0 0 0 6 12 28 0 3 7 37.4 22.7 Geothermal 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 1 25.3 18.8 Solar PV 0 1 2 5 6 8 0 2 2 11.8 7.6 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Marine 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 944 2 006 1 991 1 998 2 028 2 087 100 100 100 0.2 0.2 Coal 550 567 557 521 520 515 28 26 25 -0.6 -0.4 Oil 371 400 408 417 424 429 21 21 21 0.3 0.2 Natural gas 1 023 1 039 1 025 1 059 1 084 1 143 51 53 55 0.5 0.5 Power sector 1 013 964 971 926 907 905 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.3 Coal 389 373 371 331 320 297 38 35 33 -1.4 -1.1 Oil 38 29 30 28 23 19 3 2 2 -2.5 -2.2 Natural gas 587 562 569 567 565 589 59 62 65 -0.1 0.2 Final consumption 809 966 950 987 1 026 1 077 100 100 100 0.7 0.6 Coal 152 188 180 184 194 212 19 19 20 0.7 0.8 Oil 296 351 358 369 380 387 38 37 36 0.5 0.4 Transport 204 230 235 241 251 263 25 24 24 0.6 0.5 Natural gas 361 427 412 434 452 478 43 44 44 0.8 0.7 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 385Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Eurasia A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 1 251 1 387 1 410 1 435 1 451 1 500 100 100 100 0.3 0.3 Coal 235 257 252 143 79 7 18 5 0 -10.1 -15.5 Oil 11 9 12 6 4 2 1 0 0 -9.7 -9.5 Natural gas 603 655 682 746 679 430 48 47 29 -0.0 -2.2 Nuclear 173 207 202 206 246 309 14 17 21 1.8 2.1 Renewables 229 259 262 333 444 752 19 31 50 4.9 5.2 Hydro 226 254 255 296 340 429 18 23 29 2.7 2.5 Bioenergy 3 3 3 10 32 140 0 2 9 22.3 19.2 Wind 0 1 1 15 45 123 0 3 8 42.2 26.1 Geothermal 1 0 0 6 15 37 0 1 2 38.0 23.7 Solar PV - 1 2 6 11 23 0 1 2 16.8 12.2 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 285 333 340 353 366 411 100 100 100 0.7 0.9 Coal 64 67 67 47 26 6 20 7 2 -8.4 -10.7 Oil 9 9 9 6 3 1 3 1 0 -10.7 -10.8 Natural gas 122 153 156 167 165 136 46 45 33 0.5 -0.7 Nuclear 25 30 31 30 34 42 9 9 10 0.9 1.5 Renewables 66 74 76 102 136 222 22 37 54 5.4 5.2 Hydro 64 71 72 84 96 119 21 26 29 2.6 2.4 Bioenergy 1 2 2 3 8 31 0 2 7 15.8 14.9 Wind 0 0 0 8 20 46 0 5 11 43.1 25.7 Geothermal 0 0 0 1 2 5 0 1 1 35.4 22.1 Solar PV 0 1 2 6 10 20 0 3 5 17.9 12.5 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Marine 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 38.5 27.4 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 944 2 006 1 991 1 857 1 651 1 207 100 100 100 -1.7 -2.4 Coal 550 567 557 401 293 157 28 18 13 -5.7 -5.9 Oil 371 400 408 396 370 298 21 22 25 -0.9 -1.5 Natural gas 1 023 1 039 1 025 1 060 987 767 51 60 64 -0.3 -1.4 Power sector 1 013 964 971 853 697 427 100 100 100 -3.0 -3.8 Coal 389 373 371 233 143 43 38 20 10 -8.3 -9.7 Oil 38 29 30 28 21 14 3 3 3 -3.2 -3.5 Natural gas 587 562 569 592 534 385 59 77 90 -0.6 -1.9 Final consumption 809 966 950 922 875 719 100 100 100 -0.7 -1.3 Coal 152 188 180 162 146 110 19 17 15 -1.9 -2.3 Oil 296 351 358 349 332 270 38 38 38 -0.7 -1.3 Transport 204 230 235 233 224 189 25 26 26 -0.4 -1.0 Natural gas 361 427 412 411 398 339 43 45 47 -0.3 -0.9 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 386Table A.3: Energy demand – Russia 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 677 756 744 741 755 782 100 100 100 0.1 0.2 Coal 101 120 115 103 98 93 15 13 12 -1.4 -1.0 Oil 126 144 147 142 145 141 20 19 18 -0.1 -0.2 Natural gas 384 414 404 415 417 422 54 55 54 0.3 0.2 Nuclear 45 54 52 53 57 66 7 8 8 0.8 1.1 Hydro 14 16 16 17 18 19 2 2 2 0.9 0.8 Bioenergy 7 9 9 10 12 20 1 2 3 2.3 3.7 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 7 22 0 1 3 36.1 24.3 Power sector 367 348 348 343 347 374 100 100 100 -0.0 0.3 Coal 71 65 64 55 51 46 18 15 12 -2.0 -1.5 Oil 11 8 8 7 6 6 2 2 1 -2.5 -2.0 Natural gas 221 201 203 205 202 202 58 58 54 -0.1 -0.0 Nuclear 45 54 52 53 57 66 15 17 18 0.8 1.1 Hydro 14 16 16 17 18 19 5 5 5 0.9 0.8 Bioenergy 4 4 4 5 6 13 1 2 3 2.9 5.3 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 7 21 0 2 6 35.9 24.2 Other energy sector 108 123 121 117 116 113 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.3 Electricity 25 29 30 28 28 29 24 24 26 -0.5 -0.0 Total final consumption 433 510 501 513 528 541 100 100 100 0.5 0.4 Coal 14 27 25 25 25 27 5 5 5 -0.0 0.2 Oil 96 120 122 120 124 122 24 24 22 0.2 -0.0 Natural gas 143 186 176 182 186 189 35 35 35 0.5 0.4 Electricity 62 65 67 71 74 83 13 14 15 1.0 1.0 Heat 115 107 107 110 113 114 21 21 21 0.5 0.3 Bioenergy 2 4 4 5 5 6 1 1 1 1.8 1.7 Other renewables - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 64.2 35.4 Industry 125 138 135 142 149 154 100 100 100 0.9 0.6 Coal 10 25 23 23 24 26 17 16 17 0.4 0.6 Oil 10 7 7 8 9 8 5 6 5 1.7 0.8 Natural gas 32 38 36 38 40 39 27 27 25 0.8 0.3 Electricity 28 29 30 31 31 33 22 21 21 0.4 0.4 Heat 45 37 36 40 43 44 27 29 29 1.5 1.0 Bioenergy 0 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 2 1.9 1.8 Other renewables - - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 52.7 31.4 Transport 96 101 101 103 106 109 100 100 100 0.4 0.4 Oil 56 62 63 64 65 64 62 61 59 0.3 0.1 Electricity 7 7 7 8 9 11 7 8 10 2.1 2.2 Bioenergy - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Other fuels 33 32 31 32 32 34 31 30 31 0.4 0.4 Buildings 149 185 182 183 184 182 100 100 100 0.1 0.0 Coal 4 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 0 -6.1 -5.9 Oil 6 16 16 16 15 13 9 8 7 -0.5 -1.1 Natural gas 43 70 66 66 66 64 36 36 35 -0.0 -0.2 Electricity 26 27 28 30 32 35 15 17 19 1.2 1.1 Heat 67 68 68 67 68 67 37 37 37 -0.0 -0.1 Bioenergy 2 2 2 2 2 3 1 1 1 0.8 0.8 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 92.1 45.8 Other 63 85 84 84 90 96 100 100 100 0.7 0.6 Petrochem.
Feedstock 60 29 29 27 31 33 35 34 34 0.5 0.5 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 387Table A.3: Energy demand – Russia A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 677 756 744 726 709 662 100 100 100 -0.5 -0.6 Coal 101 120 115 84 63 38 15 9 6 -5.3 -5.1 Oil 126 144 147 138 134 112 20 19 17 -0.8 -1.3 Natural gas 384 414 404 416 396 327 54 56 49 -0.2 -1.0 Nuclear 45 54 52 53 64 77 7 9 12 1.8 1.8 Hydro 14 16 16 19 22 26 2 3 4 2.7 2.3 Bioenergy 7 9 9 11 17 44 1 2 7 5.6 7.8 Other renewables 0 0 0 5 13 37 0 2 6 44.5 27.5 Power sector 367 348 348 339 332 326 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.3 Coal 71 65 64 40 24 9 18 7 3 -8.5 -9.0 Oil 11 8 8 6 6 4 2 2 1 -3.2 -3.3 Natural gas 221 201 203 209 192 137 58 58 42 -0.5 -1.9 Nuclear 45 54 52 53 64 77 15 19 24 1.8 1.8 Hydro 14 16 16 19 22 26 5 7 8 2.7 2.3 Bioenergy 4 4 4 6 11 38 1 3 12 8.8 10.8 Other renewables 0 0 0 5 12 35 0 4 11 44.0 27.2 Other energy sector 108 123 121 114 106 88 100 100 100 -1.2 -1.5 Electricity 25 29 30 28 26 22 24 25 25 -1.1 -1.4 Total final consumption 433 510 501 494 484 441 100 100 100 -0.3 -0.6 Coal 14 27 25 23 20 17 5 4 4 -2.0 -2.0 Oil 96 120 122 117 115 96 24 24 22 -0.6 -1.1 Natural gas 143 186 176 177 174 156 35 36 35 -0.1 -0.6 Electricity 62 65 67 69 71 76 13 15 17 0.6 0.6 Heat 115 107 107 103 97 83 21 20 19 -0.8 -1.2 Bioenergy 2 4 4 5 5 6 1 1 1 1.4 1.6 Other renewables - - 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 88.1 48.2 Industry 125 138 135 136 134 125 100 100 100 -0.0 -0.4 Coal 10 25 23 21 20 17 17 15 13 -1.5 -1.6 Oil 10 7 7 8 8 7 5 6 6 0.9 -0.0 Natural gas 32 38 36 38 38 35 27 28 28 0.4 -0.2 Electricity 28 29 30 30 30 30 22 23 24 0.1 0.1 Heat 45 37 36 37 36 31 27 27 25 -0.1 -0.8 Bioenergy 0 2 2 2 3 4 2 2 3 2.5 2.4 Other renewables - - 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 76.2 45.2 Transport 96 101 101 98 94 80 100 100 100 -0.7 -1.1 Oil 56 62 63 62 59 45 62 62 57 -0.7 -1.6 Electricity 7 7 7 8 9 13 7 10 17 2.3 3.0 Bioenergy - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Other fuels 33 32 31 28 26 21 31 28 27 -1.6 -1.8 Buildings 149 185 182 176 169 146 100 100 100 -0.7 -1.0 Coal 4 2 2 1 1 - 1 0 - -8.0 n.a.
Oil 6 16 16 15 14 10 9 8 7 -1.2 -2.4 Natural gas 43 70 66 65 62 50 36 37 34 -0.5 -1.3 Electricity 26 27 28 29 29 30 15 17 21 0.4 0.4 Heat 67 68 68 63 59 50 37 35 34 -1.2 -1.4 Bioenergy 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 2 -0.1 0.2 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables - 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 117.9 57.0 Other 63 85 84 83 88 90 100 100 100 0.4 0.4 Petrochem.
Feedstock 60 29 29 26 30 30 35 34 33 0.1 0.1 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 388Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Russia 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 1 036 1 113 1 129 1 168 1 207 1 321 100 100 100 0.6 0.8 Coal 166 178 173 150 136 126 15 11 10 -2.1 -1.5 Oil 9 8 12 5 4 2 1 0 0 -9.7 -8.9 Natural gas 521 528 550 601 601 599 49 50 45 0.8 0.4 Nuclear 170 205 200 203 219 253 18 18 19 0.9 1.1 Renewables 170 195 195 208 246 341 17 20 26 2.1 2.7 Hydro 166 191 190 196 208 227 17 17 17 0.9 0.8 Bioenergy 3 3 3 4 9 34 0 1 3 9.7 11.7 Wind 0 0 0 5 20 57 0 2 4 46.3 28.4 Geothermal 1 0 0 1 6 19 0 0 1 26.4 19.8 Solar PV - 1 1 2 3 5 0 0 0 9.4 7.2 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 227 267 270 276 281 301 100 100 100 0.4 0.5 Coal 48 51 51 42 33 26 19 12 9 -3.9 -3.2 Oil 4 4 4 2 2 1 1 1 0 -7.8 -7.5 Natural gas 102 127 128 139 138 136 47 49 45 0.7 0.3 Nuclear 25 29 30 30 32 35 11 12 12 0.5 0.6 Renewables 49 56 57 62 74 101 21 26 33 2.5 2.8 Hydro 47 53 54 56 59 63 20 21 21 0.8 0.8 Bioenergy 1 2 2 2 3 8 1 1 3 5.8 8.0 Wind 0 0 0 2 9 23 0 3 7 41.7 25.5 Geothermal 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 1 23.9 18.2 Solar PV 0 1 1 2 3 4 0 1 1 8.7 6.6 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Marine 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 505 1 552 1 532 1 513 1 502 1 478 100 100 100 -0.2 -0.2 Coal 405 411 399 359 345 331 26 23 22 -1.3 -0.9 Oil 298 303 310 309 309 293 20 21 20 -0.0 -0.3 Natural gas 803 838 823 846 848 853 54 56 58 0.3 0.2 Power sector 871 778 781 743 717 696 100 100 100 -0.8 -0.5 Coal 313 273 270 234 216 197 35 30 28 -2.0 -1.5 Oil 36 28 28 23 22 19 4 3 3 -2.5 -2.0 Natural gas 523 477 482 486 479 480 62 67 69 -0.1 -0.0 Final consumption 571 732 710 717 725 716 100 100 100 0.2 0.0 Coal 85 133 124 121 124 130 17 17 18 0.0 0.2 Oil 229 264 270 273 275 262 38 38 37 0.2 -0.1 Transport 167 183 187 189 192 190 26 27 27 0.3 0.1 Natural gas 257 334 316 323 326 324 44 45 45 0.3 0.1 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 389Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Russia A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 1 036 1 113 1 129 1 149 1 146 1 155 100 100 100 0.1 0.1 Coal 166 178 173 95 43 2 15 4 0 -11.9 -20.0 Oil 9 8 12 5 4 2 1 0 0 -9.7 -9.3 Natural gas 521 528 550 599 531 308 49 46 27 -0.3 -2.7 Nuclear 170 205 200 204 244 294 18 21 25 1.8 1.9 Renewables 170 195 195 246 324 550 17 28 48 4.7 5.1 Hydro 166 191 190 220 255 306 17 22 27 2.7 2.3 Bioenergy 3 3 3 9 29 123 0 3 11 21.8 18.8 Wind 0 0 0 9 25 79 0 2 7 49.3 30.5 Geothermal 1 0 0 5 12 32 0 1 3 35.2 22.9 Solar PV - 1 1 3 4 8 0 0 1 12.6 10.0 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 227 267 270 276 274 292 100 100 100 0.1 0.4 Coal 48 51 51 34 18 4 19 7 1 -9.1 -11.3 Oil 4 4 4 2 2 1 1 1 0 -7.8 -7.5 Natural gas 102 127 128 136 124 90 47 45 31 -0.3 -1.6 Nuclear 25 29 30 30 34 40 11 12 14 0.9 1.3 Renewables 49 56 57 73 95 153 21 35 52 4.8 4.8 Hydro 47 53 54 62 71 84 20 26 29 2.6 2.1 Bioenergy 1 2 2 3 8 28 1 3 10 15.1 14.4 Wind 0 0 0 4 11 29 0 4 10 44.4 27.0 Geothermal 0 0 0 1 2 4 0 1 2 32.2 21.2 Solar PV 0 1 1 2 4 7 0 1 2 11.8 9.4 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Marine 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 38.5 27.4 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 505 1 552 1 532 1 428 1 272 902 100 100 100 -1.7 -2.5 Coal 405 411 399 284 206 121 26 16 13 -5.8 -5.5 Oil 298 303 310 298 281 216 20 22 24 -0.9 -1.7 Natural gas 803 838 823 845 785 580 54 62 64 -0.4 -1.7 Power sector 871 778 781 689 574 345 100 100 100 -2.8 -3.8 Coal 313 273 270 170 102 37 35 18 11 -8.5 -9.0 Oil 36 28 28 22 20 14 4 3 4 -3.2 -3.3 Natural gas 523 477 482 497 452 309 62 79 89 -0.6 -2.1 Final consumption 571 732 710 686 648 520 100 100 100 -0.8 -1.5 Coal 85 133 124 111 101 81 17 16 16 -1.9 -2.0 Oil 229 264 270 264 250 192 38 39 37 -0.7 -1.6 Transport 167 183 187 183 174 135 26 27 26 -0.7 -1.6 Natural gas 257 334 316 311 298 246 44 46 47 -0.5 -1.2 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 390Table A.3: Energy demand – Asia Pacific 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 4 958 5 992 6 123 6 624 7 128 7 872 100 100 100 1.4 1.2 Coal 2 459 2 865 2 894 2 923 2 927 2 824 47 41 36 0.1 -0.1 Oil 1 212 1 514 1 542 1 646 1 745 1 781 25 24 23 1.1 0.7 Natural gas 483 678 702 863 984 1 252 11 14 16 3.1 2.8 Nuclear 152 148 172 223 308 416 3 4 5 5.5 4.3 Hydro 95 150 159 164 184 221 3 3 3 1.4 1.6 Bioenergy 506 494 497 536 582 651 8 8 8 1.4 1.3 Other renewables 51 144 156 270 397 726 3 6 9 8.8 7.6 Power sector 1 863 2 586 2 672 2 942 3 240 3 777 100 100 100 1.8 1.7 Coal 1 249 1 758 1 794 1 843 1 873 1 846 67 58 49 0.4 0.1 Oil 71 48 44 36 30 21 2 1 1 -3.4 -3.4 Natural gas 226 281 283 315 341 411 11 11 11 1.7 1.8 Nuclear 152 148 172 223 308 416 6 10 11 5.5 4.3 Hydro 95 150 159 164 184 221 6 6 6 1.4 1.6 Bioenergy 33 93 102 139 166 224 4 5 6 4.6 3.8 Other renewables 38 107 118 221 336 637 4 10 17 10.0 8.3 Other energy sector 605 650 661 674 707 746 100 100 100 0.6 0.6 Electricity 117 166 172 185 202 243 26 29 33 1.5 1.7 Total final consumption 3 283 3 945 4 024 4 426 4 784 5 344 100 100 100 1.6 1.4 Coal 898 838 834 804 782 729 21 16 14 -0.6 -0.6 Oil 1 035 1 339 1 368 1 503 1 604 1 650 34 34 31 1.5 0.9 Natural gas 214 333 354 467 547 715 9 11 13 4.0 3.4 Electricity 596 898 927 1 093 1 259 1 612 23 26 30 2.8 2.7 Heat 69 112 120 124 127 130 3 3 2 0.6 0.4 Bioenergy 457 388 383 385 403 414 10 8 8 0.5 0.4 Other renewables 13 37 38 49 61 89 1 1 2 4.4 4.2 Industry 1 431 1 611 1 659 1 811 1 933 2 170 100 100 100 1.4 1.3 Coal 750 679 692 680 669 637 42 35 29 -0.3 -0.4 Oil 149 140 142 143 143 138 9 7 6 0.1 -0.1 Natural gas 94 163 172 245 302 428 10 16 20 5.2 4.4 Electricity 329 482 498 572 630 751 30 33 35 2.2 2.0 Heat 46 75 80 79 79 75 5 4 3 -0.1 -0.3 Bioenergy 62 73 75 90 107 132 4 6 6 3.3 2.8 Other renewables 0 1 1 1 3 9 0 0 0 13.9 12.5 Transport 529 756 778 896 1 008 1 123 100 100 100 2.4 1.8 Oil 501 698 714 793 863 884 92 86 79 1.7 1.0 Electricity 9 16 17 31 49 98 2 5 9 10.1 8.7 Bioenergy 4 10 12 25 43 69 2 4 6 12.4 8.8 Other fuels 15 32 35 48 53 72 4 5 6 3.8 3.5 Buildings 951 1 084 1 086 1 142 1 216 1 360 100 100 100 1.0 1.1 Coal 100 93 79 55 41 15 7 3 1 -5.8 -7.5 Oil 122 151 156 150 147 134 14 12 10 -0.6 -0.7 Natural gas 70 107 114 142 156 176 11 13 13 2.9 2.1 Electricity 231 355 366 438 522 702 34 43 52 3.3 3.2 Heat 22 38 40 45 49 55 4 4 4 1.8 1.5 Bioenergy 392 305 296 267 247 200 27 20 15 -1.6 -1.9 Traditional biomass 372 284 276 244 215 157 25 18 12 -2.2 -2.6 Other renewables 13 34 35 45 55 78 3 5 6 4.2 3.8 Other 371 492 500 576 626 691 100 100 100 2.1 1.6 Petrochem.
Feedstock 226 289 296 348 379 437 59 60 63 2.3 1.9 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 391Table A.3: Energy demand – Asia Pacific A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 4 958 5 992 6 123 6 161 6 052 5 989 100 100 100 -0.1 -0.1 Coal 2 459 2 865 2 894 2 507 1 933 1 095 47 32 18 -3.6 -4.5 Oil 1 212 1 514 1 542 1 553 1 503 1 157 25 25 19 -0.2 -1.4 Natural gas 483 678 702 837 950 1 056 11 16 18 2.8 2.0 Nuclear 152 148 172 248 364 533 3 6 9 7.1 5.5 Hydro 95 150 159 174 208 260 3 3 4 2.5 2.4 Bioenergy 506 494 497 486 470 671 8 8 11 -0.5 1.4 Other renewables 51 144 156 356 623 1 217 3 10 20 13.4 10.3 Power sector 1 863 2 586 2 672 2 742 2 791 3 051 100 100 100 0.4 0.6 Coal 1 249 1 758 1 794 1 502 1 064 445 67 38 15 -4.6 -6.4 Oil 71 48 44 32 26 18 2 1 1 -4.6 -4.3 Natural gas 226 281 283 328 375 366 11 13 12 2.6 1.2 Nuclear 152 148 172 248 364 533 6 13 17 7.1 5.5 Hydro 95 150 159 174 208 260 6 7 9 2.5 2.4 Bioenergy 33 93 102 161 213 339 4 8 11 6.9 5.9 Other renewables 38 107 118 297 540 1 091 4 19 36 14.8 11.2 Other energy sector 605 650 661 640 626 620 100 100 100 -0.5 -0.3 Electricity 117 166 172 174 176 204 26 28 33 0.2 0.8 Total final consumption 3 283 3 945 4 024 4 149 4 127 4 114 100 100 100 0.2 0.1 Coal 898 838 834 741 638 472 21 15 11 -2.4 -2.7 Oil 1 035 1 339 1 368 1 423 1 383 1 067 34 34 26 0.1 -1.2 Natural gas 214 333 354 425 458 479 9 11 12 2.4 1.4 Electricity 596 898 927 1 067 1 201 1 506 23 29 37 2.4 2.3 Heat 69 112 120 116 105 89 3 3 2 -1.2 -1.4 Bioenergy 457 388 383 313 246 321 10 6 8 -4.0 -0.8 Other renewables 13 37 38 59 83 127 1 2 3 7.4 5.9 Industry 1 431 1 611 1 659 1 692 1 654 1 658 100 100 100 -0.0 -0.0 Coal 750 679 692 623 540 411 42 33 25 -2.2 -2.5 Oil 149 140 142 126 105 78 9 6 5 -2.7 -2.8 Natural gas 94 163 172 227 253 300 10 15 18 3.6 2.7 Electricity 329 482 498 557 595 695 30 36 42 1.6 1.6 Heat 46 75 80 71 58 39 5 3 2 -2.9 -3.3 Bioenergy 62 73 75 83 91 107 4 6 6 1.8 1.8 Other renewables 0 1 1 5 12 26 0 1 2 28.6 18.4 Transport 529 756 778 865 909 818 100 100 100 1.4 0.2 Oil 501 698 714 743 715 463 92 79 57 0.0 -2.0 Electricity 9 16 17 34 66 170 2 7 21 13.1 11.6 Bioenergy 4 10 12 44 75 107 2 8 13 18.3 11.1 Other fuels 15 32 35 44 52 77 4 6 9 3.8 3.8 Buildings 951 1 084 1 086 1 034 973 1 025 100 100 100 -1.0 -0.3 Coal 100 93 79 53 35 4 7 4 0 -7.1 -13.1 Oil 122 151 156 149 142 93 14 15 9 -0.9 -2.4 Natural gas 70 107 114 127 126 97 11 13 9 0.9 -0.8 Electricity 231 355 366 426 485 586 34 50 57 2.6 2.3 Heat 22 38 40 45 48 50 4 5 5 1.5 1.0 Bioenergy 392 305 296 182 70 87 27 7 9 -12.3 -5.7 Traditional biomass 372 284 276 141 - - 25 - - n.a.
Other renewables 13 34 35 51 67 96 3 7 9 6.0 4.8 Other 371 492 500 558 591 613 100 100 100 1.5 1.0 Petrochem.
Feedstock 226 289 296 341 364 402 59 62 65 1.9 1.5 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 392Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Asia Pacific 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 8 288 12 374 12 767 14 863 16 983 21 560 100 100 100 2.6 2.5 Coal 4 955 7 332 7 407 7 806 7 982 8 028 58 47 37 0.7 0.4 Oil 269 175 156 125 99 64 1 1 0 -4.0 -4.2 Natural gas 1 150 1 476 1 474 1 733 1 911 2 408 12 11 11 2.4 2.4 Nuclear 582 569 659 855 1 183 1 599 5 7 7 5.5 4.3 Renewables 1 311 2 801 3 051 4 323 5 786 9 440 24 34 44 6.0 5.5 Hydro 1 110 1 745 1 849 1 904 2 144 2 571 14 13 12 1.4 1.6 Bioenergy 91 245 274 416 518 729 2 3 3 5.9 4.8 Wind 77 466 512 941 1 368 2 457 4 8 11 9.3 7.8 Geothermal 28 35 36 51 73 123 0 0 1 6.7 6.0 Solar PV 6 309 377 1 006 1 662 3 489 3 10 16 14.4 11.2 CSP 0 0 2 4 18 57 0 0 0 21.0 16.7 Marine 0 0 1 1 3 14 0 0 0 16.9 16.5 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 1 850 3 223 3 386 4 340 5 214 7 275 100 100 100 4.0 3.7 Coal 918 1 466 1 516 1 662 1 688 1 691 45 32 23 1.0 0.5 Oil 121 112 109 87 75 53 3 1 1 -3.3 -3.4 Natural gas 270 397 406 483 535 657 12 10 9 2.5 2.3 Nuclear 90 120 118 139 168 220 3 3 3 3.2 3.0 Renewables 451 1 124 1 231 1 940 2 673 4 407 36 51 61 7.3 6.3 Hydro 370 544 550 637 719 856 16 14 12 2.5 2.1 Bioenergy 22 51 57 80 98 132 2 2 2 5.0 4.1 Wind 48 235 266 443 616 999 8 12 14 7.9 6.5 Geothermal 4 5 6 8 11 18 0 0 0 5.9 5.6 Solar PV 6 288 351 769 1 222 2 380 10 23 33 12.0 9.5 CSP 0 0 1 2 6 17 0 0 0 22.4 16.8 Marine 0 0 0 0 1 5 0 0 0 14.5 15.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 13 079 15 999 16 265 16 851 17 244 17 241 100 100 100 0.5 0.3 Coal 9 185 11 049 11 193 11 221 11 167 10 685 69 65 62 -0.0 -0.2 Oil 2 845 3 471 3 540 3 741 3 944 3 924 22 23 23 1.0 0.5 Natural gas 1 049 1 480 1 531 1 890 2 133 2 631 9 12 15 3.1 2.6 Power sector 5 889 8 023 8 167 8 414 8 557 8 530 100 100 100 0.4 0.2 Coal 5 131 7 207 7 358 7 555 7 657 7 497 90 89 88 0.4 0.1 Oil 228 156 143 118 98 69 2 1 1 -3.4 -3.4 Natural gas 530 661 666 742 802 964 8 9 11 1.7 1.8 Final consumption 6 609 7 396 7 519 7 831 8 046 8 060 100 100 100 0.6 0.3 Coal 3 759 3 639 3 643 3 487 3 342 3 039 48 42 38 -0.8 -0.9 Oil 2 427 3 099 3 177 3 415 3 628 3 646 42 45 45 1.2 0.7 Transport 1 507 2 096 2 146 2 383 2 595 2 659 29 32 33 1.7 1.0 Natural gas 422 657 699 929 1 075 1 376 9 13 17 4.0 3.3 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 393Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Asia Pacific A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 8 288 12 374 12 767 14 437 16 014 19 886 100 100 100 2.1 2.1 Coal 4 955 7 332 7 407 6 320 4 458 1 788 58 28 9 -4.5 -6.5 Oil 269 175 156 109 85 49 1 1 0 -5.4 -5.3 Natural gas 1 150 1 476 1 474 1 842 2 172 2 122 12 14 11 3.6 1.8 Nuclear 582 569 659 953 1 397 2 046 5 9 10 7.1 5.5 Renewables 1 311 2 801 3 051 5 191 7 880 13 859 24 49 70 9.0 7.5 Hydro 1 110 1 745 1 849 2 025 2 418 3 028 14 15 15 2.5 2.4 Bioenergy 91 245 274 485 634 1 083 2 4 5 7.9 6.8 Wind 77 466 512 1 249 2 087 3 899 4 13 20 13.6 10.1 Geothermal 28 35 36 73 145 277 0 1 1 13.6 10.2 Solar PV 6 309 377 1 346 2 549 5 301 3 16 27 19.0 13.4 CSP 0 0 2 11 41 253 0 0 1 30.4 25.3 Marine 0 0 1 2 5 18 0 0 0 22.2 17.8 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 1 850 3 223 3 386 4 743 6 113 8 956 100 100 100 5.5 4.7 Coal 918 1 466 1 516 1 535 1 376 968 45 23 11 -0.9 -2.1 Oil 121 112 109 87 76 53 3 1 1 -3.2 -3.4 Natural gas 270 397 406 500 557 664 12 9 7 2.9 2.4 Nuclear 90 120 118 148 195 274 3 3 3 4.7 4.1 Renewables 451 1 124 1 231 2 433 3 804 6 624 36 62 74 10.8 8.3 Hydro 370 544 550 687 821 1 016 16 13 11 3.7 3.0 Bioenergy 22 51 57 95 121 197 2 2 2 7.1 6.1 Wind 48 235 266 594 936 1 603 8 15 18 12.1 8.9 Geothermal 4 5 6 12 22 41 0 0 0 13.3 9.9 Solar PV 6 288 351 1 042 1 888 3 683 10 31 41 16.5 11.8 CSP 0 0 1 4 14 78 0 0 1 32.0 25.5 Marine 0 0 0 1 2 6 0 0 0 19.4 16.3 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 13 079 15 999 16 265 14 827 12 199 6 715 100 100 100 -2.6 -4.1 Coal 9 185 11 049 11 193 9 500 6 943 2 801 69 57 42 -4.2 -6.4 Oil 2 845 3 471 3 540 3 482 3 268 2 148 22 27 32 -0.7 -2.4 Natural gas 1 049 1 480 1 531 1 845 1 996 1 870 9 16 28 2.4 1.0 Power sector 5 889 8 023 8 167 7 018 5 153 1 915 100 100 100 -4.1 -6.7 Coal 5 131 7 207 7 358 6 142 4 193 1 131 90 81 59 -5.0 -8.5 Oil 228 156 143 104 85 57 2 2 3 -4.6 -4.3 Natural gas 530 661 666 771 874 782 8 17 41 2.5 0.8 Final consumption 6 609 7 396 7 519 7 233 6 512 4 403 100 100 100 -1.3 -2.5 Coal 3 759 3 639 3 643 3 193 2 615 1 589 48 40 36 -3.0 -3.9 Oil 2 427 3 099 3 177 3 188 3 003 1 970 42 46 45 -0.5 -2.2 Transport 1 507 2 096 2 146 2 230 2 149 1 394 29 33 32 0.0 -2.0 Natural gas 422 657 699 852 894 844 9 14 19 2.3 0.9 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 394Table A.3: Energy demand – China 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 2 550 3 211 3 314 3 566 3 735 3 898 100 100 100 1.1 0.8 Coal 1 797 1 986 2 005 2 014 1 945 1 767 61 52 45 -0.3 -0.6 Oil 431 614 644 671 699 651 19 19 17 0.8 0.1 Natural gas 93 233 253 340 397 509 8 11 13 4.2 3.4 Nuclear 19 77 91 118 169 251 3 5 6 5.8 4.9 Hydro 61 103 109 112 119 135 3 3 3 0.8 1.0 Bioenergy 133 117 121 154 183 212 4 5 5 3.8 2.7 Other renewables 16 81 90 158 222 373 3 6 10 8.6 7.0 Power sector 957 1 476 1 554 1 738 1 876 2 124 100 100 100 1.7 1.5 Coal 829 1 155 1 192 1 237 1 224 1 181 77 65 56 0.2 -0.0 Oil 9 7 8 6 6 5 0 0 0 -2.7 -2.5 Natural gas 21 50 54 78 100 137 3 5 6 5.8 4.6 Nuclear 19 77 91 118 169 251 6 9 12 5.8 4.9 Hydro 61 103 109 112 119 135 7 6 6 0.8 1.0 Bioenergy 13 37 45 73 89 117 3 5 6 6.4 4.7 Other renewables 4 47 55 114 169 298 4 9 14 10.8 8.4 Other energy sector 376 399 409 396 392 364 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.6 Electricity 63 97 102 108 113 124 25 29 34 1.0 1.0 Total final consumption 1 653 2 067 2 122 2 325 2 454 2 576 100 100 100 1.3 0.9 Coal 713 636 622 572 523 421 29 21 16 -1.6 -1.8 Oil 372 539 565 621 652 613 27 27 24 1.3 0.4 Natural gas 74 154 167 235 271 339 8 11 13 4.5 3.4 Electricity 300 521 545 656 742 909 26 30 35 2.9 2.5 Heat 62 103 111 115 118 121 5 5 5 0.6 0.4 Bioenergy 121 80 76 81 93 95 4 4 4 1.9 1.1 Other renewables 12 34 35 44 53 75 2 2 3 3.8 3.6 Industry 933 1 003 1 035 1 092 1 113 1 142 100 100 100 0.7 0.5 Coal 584 496 499 463 423 340 48 38 30 -1.5 -1.8 Oil 68 51 54 50 47 40 5 4 4 -1.3 -1.4 Natural gas 35 65 71 110 135 183 7 12 16 6.0 4.6 Electricity 203 321 335 390 421 486 32 38 43 2.1 1.8 Heat 42 69 74 74 74 71 7 7 6 -0.0 -0.2 Bioenergy - 0 0 5 11 17 0 1 2 155.8 67.2 Other renewables 0 1 1 1 2 5 0 0 0 10.7 11.7 Transport 199 327 345 408 455 465 100 100 100 2.6 1.4 Oil 185 290 305 340 361 316 88 79 68 1.6 0.2 Electricity 6 12 13 24 37 70 4 8 15 10.2 8.5 Bioenergy 2 2 3 11 22 32 1 5 7 19.9 11.8 Other fuels 7 22 24 33 35 47 7 8 10 3.4 3.2 Buildings 372 503 502 545 580 630 100 100 100 1.3 1.1 Coal 82 77 61 41 28 6 12 5 1 -6.7 -10.3 Oil 36 60 63 56 50 36 13 9 6 -2.1 -2.6 Natural gas 25 56 61 83 91 100 12 16 16 3.7 2.4 Electricity 79 166 174 218 260 332 35 45 53 3.7 3.1 Heat 19 34 36 41 45 50 7 8 8 1.9 1.5 Bioenergy 119 77 73 64 56 38 15 10 6 -2.3 -3.1 Traditional biomass 112 70 66 56 44 21 13 8 3 -3.5 -5.3 Other renewables 11 32 33 41 50 68 7 9 11 3.7 3.4 Other 149 234 241 279 306 339 100 100 100 2.2 1.6 Petrochem.
Feedstock 76 123 132 161 178 215 55 58 64 2.8 2.4 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 395Table A.3: Energy demand – China A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 2 550 3 211 3 314 3 324 3 164 2 897 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.6 Coal 1 797 1 986 2 005 1 777 1 366 732 61 43 25 -3.4 -4.7 Oil 431 614 644 633 593 410 19 19 14 -0.7 -2.1 Natural gas 93 233 253 316 356 411 8 11 14 3.2 2.3 Nuclear 19 77 91 131 206 315 3 7 11 7.7 6.1 Hydro 61 103 109 116 130 146 3 4 5 1.6 1.4 Bioenergy 133 117 121 156 196 302 4 6 10 4.4 4.4 Other renewables 16 81 90 195 317 582 3 10 20 12.1 9.3 Power sector 957 1 476 1 554 1 614 1 592 1 625 100 100 100 0.2 0.2 Coal 829 1 155 1 192 1 054 780 358 77 49 22 -3.8 -5.6 Oil 9 7 8 6 5 3 0 0 0 -3.5 -4.2 Natural gas 21 50 54 80 105 134 3 7 8 6.2 4.4 Nuclear 19 77 91 131 206 315 6 13 19 7.7 6.1 Hydro 61 103 109 116 130 146 7 8 9 1.6 1.4 Bioenergy 13 37 45 82 116 177 3 7 11 8.9 6.7 Other renewables 4 47 55 146 252 492 4 16 30 14.9 11.0 Other energy sector 376 399 409 368 331 278 100 100 100 -1.9 -1.8 Electricity 63 97 102 102 97 100 25 29 36 -0.4 -0.1 Total final consumption 1 653 2 067 2 122 2 201 2 149 2 022 100 100 100 0.1 -0.2 Coal 713 636 622 528 421 261 29 20 13 -3.5 -4.1 Oil 372 539 565 589 556 391 27 26 19 -0.1 -1.7 Natural gas 74 154 167 214 221 199 8 10 10 2.6 0.8 Electricity 300 521 545 638 704 841 26 33 42 2.4 2.1 Heat 62 103 111 107 97 82 5 5 4 -1.2 -1.4 Bioenergy 121 80 76 74 80 125 4 4 6 0.4 2.4 Other renewables 12 34 35 50 65 90 2 3 4 5.8 4.6 Industry 933 1 003 1 035 1 022 940 855 100 100 100 -0.9 -0.9 Coal 584 496 499 424 334 202 48 36 24 -3.6 -4.2 Oil 68 51 54 44 30 17 5 3 2 -5.1 -5.3 Natural gas 35 65 71 104 110 113 7 12 13 4.0 2.2 Electricity 203 321 335 376 396 450 32 42 53 1.5 1.4 Heat 42 69 74 66 53 36 7 6 4 -2.9 -3.3 Bioenergy - 0 0 5 11 2 3 0 1 3 155.5 69.4 Other renewables 0 1 1 3 6 12 0 1 1 25.4 16.1 Transport 199 327 345 394 413 356 100 100 100 1.7 0.1 Oil 185 290 305 318 296 156 88 72 44 -0.2 -3.1 Electricity 6 12 13 26 46 102 4 11 29 12.5 10.4 Bioenergy 2 2 3 19 37 51 1 9 14 25.4 14.4 Other fuels 7 22 24 30 33 47 7 8 13 2.9 3.2 Buildings 372 503 502 513 506 509 100 100 100 0.1 0.1 Coal 82 77 61 40 26 2 12 5 0 -7.5 -14.2 Oil 36 60 63 55 47 21 13 9 4 -2.7 -5.0 Natural gas 25 56 61 72 70 47 12 14 9 1.3 -1.2 Electricity 79 166 174 211 237 268 35 47 53 2.8 2.1 Heat 19 34 36 41 44 46 7 9 9 1.6 1.1 Bioenergy 119 77 73 48 27 41 15 5 8 -8.7 -2.8 Traditional biomass 112 70 66 34 - - 13 - - n.a.
Other renewables 11 32 33 45 56 75 7 11 15 4.9 4.0 Other 149 234 241 273 290 302 100 100 100 1.7 1.1 Petrochem.
Feedstock 76 123 132 159 172 201 55 59 67 2.4 2.0 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 396Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – China 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 4 236 7 185 7 518 8 891 9 952 12 023 100 100 100 2.6 2.3 Coal 3 263 4 796 4 878 5 179 5 152 5 025 65 52 42 0.5 0.1 Oil 15 11 11 7 5 3 0 0 0 -7.0 -6.3 Natural gas 92 237 251 402 529 756 3 5 6 7.0 5.4 Nuclear 74 295 350 451 648 962 5 7 8 5.8 4.9 Renewables 791 1 846 2 029 2 852 3 618 5 277 27 36 44 5.4 4.7 Hydro 711 1 199 1 270 1 297 1 389 1 568 17 14 13 0.8 1.0 Bioenergy 34 104 128 229 289 390 2 3 3 7.7 5.5 Wind 45 366 406 725 979 1 545 5 10 13 8.3 6.6 Geothermal 0 0 0 1 2 12 0 0 0 28.8 23.1 Solar PV 1 177 224 597 944 1 722 3 9 14 14.0 10.2 CSP 0 0 2 3 14 39 0 0 0 18.2 14.6 Marine 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 39.6 26.3 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 954 1 887 1 991 2 577 3 062 3 945 100 100 100 4.0 3.3 Coal 648 1 020 1 051 1 132 1 148 1 110 53 38 28 0.8 0.3 Oil 8 8 8 8 8 5 0 0 0 -0.9 -2.6 Natural gas 36 81 86 120 145 178 4 5 5 4.9 3.5 Nuclear 11 46 49 65 93 135 2 3 3 6.1 5.0 Renewables 252 730 796 1 241 1 642 2 448 40 54 62 6.8 5.5 Hydro 216 352 356 411 446 508 18 15 13 2.1 1.7 Bioenergy 5 18 23 41 50 66 1 2 2 7.1 5.0 Wind 30 184 210 342 445 641 11 15 16 7.1 5.4 Geothermal 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 27.3 21.7 Solar PV 1 175 205 446 696 1 219 10 23 31 11.7 8.9 CSP - 0 0 2 5 11 0 0 0 24.7 17.0 Marine 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 36.9 24.3 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 7 850 9 538 9 756 9 988 9 829 9 111 100 100 100 0.1 -0.3 Coal 6 600 7 637 7 743 7 675 7 337 6 585 79 75 72 -0.5 -0.8 Oil 1 018 1 375 1 445 1 511 1 550 1 338 15 16 15 0.6 -0.4 Natural gas 233 526 569 803 942 1 188 6 10 13 4.7 3.6 Power sector 3 483 4 890 5 054 5 295 5 282 5 164 100 100 100 0.4 0.1 Coal 3 402 4 748 4 902 5 088 5 026 4 825 97 95 93 0.2 -0.1 Oil 31 24 26 22 19 15 1 0 0 -2.7 -2.5 Natural gas 50 118 127 185 236 324 3 4 6 5.8 4.6 Final consumption 4 013 4 330 4 385 4 380 4 235 3 668 100 100 100 -0.3 -0.8 Coal 2 962 2 749 2 712 2 460 2 194 1 662 62 52 45 -1.9 -2.3 Oil 894 1 243 1 307 1 386 1 425 1 233 30 34 34 0.8 -0.3 Transport 559 873 915 1 022 1 084 952 21 26 26 1.6 0.2 Natural gas 157 338 367 534 616 773 8 15 21 4.8 3.6 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 397Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – China A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 4 236 7 185 7 518 8 607 9 317 10 951 100 100 100 2.0 1.8 Coal 3 263 4 796 4 878 4 394 3 236 1 431 65 35 13 -3.7 -5.7 Oil 15 11 11 8 6 1 0 0 0 -4.8 -12.0 Natural gas 92 237 251 421 583 683 3 6 6 8.0 4.9 Nuclear 74 295 350 502 790 1 209 5 8 11 7.7 6.1 Renewables 791 1 846 2 029 3 283 4 703 7 627 27 50 70 7.9 6.5 Hydro 711 1 199 1 270 1 345 1 507 1 701 17 16 16 1.6 1.4 Bioenergy 34 104 128 256 338 543 2 4 5 9.3 7.1 Wind 45 366 406 910 1 360 2 256 5 15 21 11.6 8.5 Geothermal 0 0 0 1 5 17 0 0 0 38.0 25.3 Solar PV 1 177 224 765 1 466 2 974 3 16 27 18.6 13.1 CSP 0 0 2 6 26 135 0 0 1 25.1 21.6 Marine 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 33.5 21.9 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 954 1 887 1 991 2 784 3 549 4 927 100 100 100 5.4 4.4 Coal 648 1 020 1 051 1 040 941 693 53 27 14 -1.0 -2.0 Oil 8 8 8 7 7 4 0 0 0 -1.6 -3.1 Natural gas 36 81 86 143 153 164 4 4 3 5.4 3.1 Nuclear 11 46 49 72 109 162 2 3 3 7.6 5.9 Renewables 252 730 796 1 502 2 285 3 752 40 64 76 10.1 7.7 Hydro 216 352 356 433 495 563 18 14 11 3.0 2.2 Bioenergy 5 18 23 47 60 94 1 2 2 9.0 6.9 Wind 30 184 210 431 614 929 11 17 19 10.2 7.3 Geothermal 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 36.2 23.9 Solar PV 1 175 205 588 1 106 2 124 10 31 43 16.5 11.8 CSP - 0 0 3 9 39 0 0 1 31.8 24.1 Marine 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 30.8 20.0 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 7 850 9 538 9 756 8 841 6 877 3 078 100 100 100 -3.1 -5.3 Coal 6 600 7 637 7 743 6 688 4 822 1 753 79 70 57 -4.2 -6.8 Oil 1 018 1 375 1 444 1 410 1 263 668 15 18 22 -1.2 -3.6 Natural gas 233 526 569 744 798 722 6 12 23 3.1 1.1 Power sector 3 483 4 890 5 054 4 535 3 313 1 136 100 100 100 -3.8 -6.9 Coal 3 402 4 748 4 902 4 325 3 056 904 97 92 80 -4.2 -7.7 Oil 31 24 26 21 18 11 1 1 1 -3.5 -4.2 Natural gas 50 118 127 189 239 256 3 7 23 5.9 3.4 Final consumption 4 013 4 330 4 385 4 027 3 325 1 812 100 100 100 -2.5 -4.1 Coal 2 962 2 749 2 712 2 247 1 674 797 62 50 44 -4.3 -5.7 Oil 894 1 243 1 307 1 298 1 161 611 30 35 34 -1.1 -3.6 Transport 559 873 915 956 891 469 21 27 26 -0.2 -3.1 Natural gas 157 338 367 482 489 404 8 15 22 2.6 0.5 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 398Table A.3: Energy demand – India 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 700 920 929 1 057 1 237 1 573 100 100 100 2.6 2.5 Coal 279 414 413 441 498 541 44 40 34 1.7 1.3 Oil 162 235 242 288 335 411 26 27 26 3.0 2.5 Natural gas 54 52 55 86 113 173 6 9 11 6.8 5.6 Nuclear 7 10 10 17 28 58 1 2 4 9.6 8.5 Hydro 11 13 15 15 19 26 2 2 2 2.3 2.7 Bioenergy 185 185 182 183 188 204 20 15 13 0.3 0.5 Other renewables 2 10 11 26 54 160 1 4 10 15.6 13.6 Power sector 237 362 355 395 475 621 100 100 100 2.7 2.7 Coal 177 285 278 285 317 311 78 67 50 1.2 0.5 Oil 7 4 3 4 3 2 1 1 0 2.8 -0.2 Natural gas 25 15 15 19 22 28 4 5 5 3.4 3.1 Nuclear 7 10 10 17 28 58 3 6 9 9.6 8.5 Hydro 11 13 15 15 19 26 4 4 4 2.3 2.7 Bioenergy 8 26 24 31 34 42 7 7 7 3.3 2.8 Other renewables 2 9 10 24 51 154 3 11 25 16.2 14.0 Other energy sector 69 87 89 101 120 162 100 100 100 2.8 2.9 Electricity 22 33 32 36 44 64 36 36 40 2.7 3.3 Total final consumption 478 607 621 723 853 1 123 100 100 100 2.9 2.9 Coal 87 107 111 129 148 185 18 17 16 2.6 2.4 Oil 138 208 216 260 306 379 35 36 34 3.2 2.7 Natural gas 19 32 35 57 78 125 6 9 11 7.5 6.3 Electricity 62 103 103 127 168 270 17 20 24 4.5 4.7 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 172 156 154 148 150 157 25 18 14 -0.2 0.1 Other renewables 0 1 1 2 3 6 0 0 1 9.3 8.1 Industry 151 218 224 277 337 465 100 100 100 3.8 3.5 Coal 75 94 99 119 139 178 44 41 38 3.2 2.9 Oil 17 30 31 34 37 40 14 11 9 1.6 1.3 Natural gas 2 19 21 37 53 92 9 16 20 8.8 7.3 Electricity 28 42 41 48 61 92 18 18 20 3.6 3.9 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 29 32 33 40 47 60 15 14 13 3.4 2.9 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 23.6 16.7 Transport 65 104 108 139 177 248 100 100 100 4.5 4.0 Oil 62 98 102 127 157 206 94 89 83 4.0 3.4 Electricity 1 2 2 2 5 13 1 3 5 11.1 10.6 Bioenergy 0 1 1 3 7 17 1 4 7 15.4 12.5 Other fuels 1 3 4 6 8 11 3 5 4 7.8 5.5 Buildings 209 217 218 218 234 283 100 100 100 0.7 1.3 Coal 12 12 13 10 9 7 6 4 2 -3.1 -3.0 Oil 30 36 38 42 47 54 17 20 19 2.0 1.7 Natural gas 1 3 3 5 6 10 2 3 3 5.8 5.1 Electricity 22 42 42 54 74 130 19 31 46 5.2 5.5 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 143 123 120 105 95 79 55 41 28 -2.1 -2.0 Traditional biomass 136 115 113 96 85 63 52 36 22 -2.6 -2.7 Other renewables 0 1 1 2 2 4 1 1 1 6.7 6.1 Other 54 68 71 89 105 128 100 100 100 3.6 2.9 Petrochem.
Feedstock 24 21 22 33 41 55 31 39 43 5.8 4.5 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 399Table A.3: Energy demand – India A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 700 920 929 952 994 1 147 100 100 100 0.6 1.0 Coal 279 414 413 362 318 209 44 32 18 -2.4 -3.2 Oil 162 235 242 272 292 268 26 29 23 1.7 0.5 Natural gas 54 52 55 87 124 181 6 12 16 7.7 5.9 Nuclear 7 10 10 16 28 64 1 3 6 9.5 9.1 Hydro 11 13 15 17 22 31 2 2 3 3.6 3.5 Bioenergy 185 185 182 155 120 169 20 12 15 -3.7 -0.4 Other renewables 2 10 11 44 90 225 1 9 20 21.0 15.4 Power sector 237 362 355 356 385 475 100 100 100 0.7 1.4 Coal 177 285 278 216 162 42 78 42 9 -4.8 -8.6 Oil 7 4 3 3 3 2 1 1 0 2.5 -0.5 Natural gas 25 15 15 26 42 52 4 11 11 9.8 6.2 Nuclear 7 10 10 16 28 64 3 7 14 9.5 9.1 Hydro 11 13 15 17 22 31 4 6 7 3.6 3.5 Bioenergy 8 26 24 37 43 72 7 11 15 5.6 5.4 Other renewables 2 9 10 41 84 212 3 22 45 21.5 15.7 Other energy sector 69 87 89 97 109 138 100 100 100 1.9 2.1 Electricity 22 33 32 34 39 56 36 35 40 1.6 2.6 Total final consumption 478 607 621 659 703 843 100 100 100 1.1 1.5 Coal 87 107 111 119 125 130 18 18 15 1.1 0.8 Oil 138 208 216 245 266 246 35 38 29 1.9 0.6 Natural gas 19 32 35 51 67 103 6 10 12 6.1 5.3 Electricity 62 103 103 127 164 254 17 23 30 4.3 4.4 Heat - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Bioenergy 172 156 154 114 73 93 25 10 11 -6.6 -2.4 Other renewables 0 1 1 3 6 13 0 1 2 16.4 12.2 Industry 151 218 224 257 290 361 100 100 100 2.4 2.3 Coal 75 94 99 109 118 130 44 41 36 1.7 1.3 Oil 17 30 31 29 28 24 14 10 7 -0.8 -1.1 Natural gas 2 19 21 32 43 72 9 15 20 6.9 6.1 Electricity 28 42 41 49 59 85 18 20 24 3.3 3.5 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 29 32 33 36 39 4 3 15 13 12 1.6 1.3 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 3 7 0 1 2 35.8 22.9 Transport 65 104 108 135 161 183 100 100 100 3.7 2.5 Oil 62 98 102 118 129 115 94 80 63 2.2 0.6 Electricity 1 2 2 3 8 26 1 5 14 15.9 14.3 Bioenergy 0 1 1 8 15 26 1 9 14 23.5 14.8 Other fuels 1 3 4 6 10 15 3 6 8 9.6 7.2 Buildings 209 217 218 184 155 190 100 100 100 -3.0 -0.6 Coal 12 12 13 10 7 1 6 4 1 -5.6 -11.6 Oil 30 36 38 45 50 42 17 32 22 2.5 0.5 Natural gas 1 3 3 4 5 6 2 3 3 2.6 2.8 Electricity 22 42 42 54 73 116 19 47 61 5.2 4.9 Heat - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Bioenergy 143 123 120 69 17 19 55 11 10 -16.3 -8.4 Traditional biomass 136 115 113 58 - - 52 - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 1 1 2 4 6 1 2 3 11.3 8.6 Other 54 68 71 84 96 110 100 100 100 2.8 2.1 Petrochem.
Feedstock 24 21 22 32 39 49 31 40 45 5.3 3.9 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 400Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – India 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 975 1 583 1 583 1 896 2 461 3 887 100 100 100 4.1 4.4 Coal 658 1 163 1 135 1 206 1 343 1 334 72 55 34 1.5 0.8 Oil 18 8 5 7 7 6 0 0 0 4.0 0.6 Natural gas 113 74 71 94 108 157 4 4 4 3.9 3.8 Nuclear 26 38 40 66 109 222 3 4 6 9.6 8.5 Renewables 160 301 332 523 893 2 169 21 36 56 9.4 9.3 Hydro 125 151 175 177 226 307 11 9 8 2.3 2.7 Bioenergy 15 45 42 67 77 106 3 3 3 5.7 4.5 Wind 20 64 66 105 195 520 4 8 13 10.3 10.3 Geothermal - - - - 0 1 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV 0 40 48 174 392 1 221 3 16 31 20.9 16.6 CSP - - - 1 3 13 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 197 393 414 573 792 1 552 100 100 100 6.1 6.5 Coal 106 224 235 269 269 260 57 34 17 1.2 0.5 Oil 8 8 8 8 8 5 2 1 0 0.0 -1.6 Natural gas 22 29 28 30 30 46 7 4 3 0.5 2.3 Nuclear 5 7 7 9 16 31 2 2 2 8.2 7.6 Renewables 57 125 137 247 436 1 066 33 55 69 11.1 10.3 Hydro 40 49 49 60 76 101 12 10 6 4.0 3.4 Bioenergy 4 12 12 13 15 20 3 2 1 2.1 2.5 Wind 13 35 38 57 96 217 9 12 14 8.9 8.7 Geothermal - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV 0 28 38 117 248 724 9 31 47 18.7 15.1 CSP - 0 0 0 1 4 0 0 0 13.8 15.1 Marine - - - - 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 572 2 307 2 319 2 576 2 948 3 359 100 100 100 2.2 1.8 Coal 1 089 1 628 1 622 1 732 1 951 2 108 70 66 63 1.7 1.3 Oil 408 595 612 720 842 1 030 26 29 31 2.9 2.5 Natural gas 75 83 84 125 156 220 4 5 7 5.7 4.7 Power sector 785 1 181 1 147 1 189 1 321 1 308 100 100 100 1.3 0.6 Coal 704 1 132 1 104 1 133 1 259 1 234 96 95 94 1.2 0.5 Oil 23 13 8 11 11 8 1 1 1 2.8 -0.2 Natural gas 58 36 35 45 51 66 3 4 5 3.4 3.1 Final consumption 752 1 066 1 110 1 316 1 544 1 949 100 100 100 3.0 2.7 Coal 383 492 514 595 686 868 46 44 45 2.7 2.5 Oil 358 543 564 669 787 972 51 51 50 3.1 2.6 Transport 190 298 309 386 475 627 28 31 32 4.0 3.4 Natural gas 12 31 32 52 70 109 3 5 6 7.4 6.0 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 401Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – India A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 975 1 583 1 583 1 869 2 365 3 601 100 100 100 3.7 4.0 Coal 658 1 163 1 135 920 708 181 72 30 5 -4.2 -8.4 Oil 18 8 5 7 7 5 0 0 0 3.3 0.1 Natural gas 113 74 71 133 240 337 4 10 9 11.7 7.7 Nuclear 26 38 40 61 107 247 3 5 7 9.5 9.1 Renewables 160 301 332 748 1 302 2 832 21 55 79 13.2 10.7 Hydro 125 151 175 196 258 361 11 11 10 3.6 3.5 Bioenergy 15 45 42 84 105 210 3 4 6 8.6 7.9 Wind 20 64 66 186 343 782 4 14 22 16.1 12.5 Geothermal - - - 0 2 5 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV 0 40 48 279 584 1 368 3 25 38 25.4 17.2 CSP - - - 2 11 104 - 0 3 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 197 393 414 685 997 1 835 100 100 100 8.3 7.3 Coal 106 224 235 250 221 144 57 22 8 -0.6 -2.3 Oil 8 8 8 7 7 5 2 1 0 -0.3 -1.9 Natural gas 22 29 28 36 72 134 7 7 7 8.8 7.6 Nuclear 5 7 7 9 17 36 2 2 2 8.8 8.2 Renewables 57 125 137 370 641 1 334 33 64 73 15.1 11.5 Hydro 40 49 49 67 86 117 12 9 6 5.2 4.2 Bioenergy 4 12 12 16 20 39 3 2 2 4.9 5.8 Wind 13 35 38 96 163 334 9 16 18 14.2 11.0 Geothermal - - - 0 0 1 - 0 0 n.a.
Solar PV 0 28 38 190 367 806 9 37 44 23.0 15.7 CSP - 0 0 1 4 36 0 0 2 29.3 27.1 Marine - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 572 2 307 2 319 2 217 2 126 1 460 100 100 100 -0.8 -2.2 Coal 1 089 1 628 1 622 1 414 1 226 637 70 58 44 -2.5 -4.4 Oil 408 595 612 669 706 594 26 33 41 1.3 -0.1 Natural gas 75 83 84 133 194 253 4 9 17 7.9 5.4 Power sector 785 1 181 1 147 929 754 214 100 100 100 -3.7 -7.7 Coal 704 1 132 1 104 859 645 114 96 86 53 -4.8 -10.3 Oil 23 13 8 11 10 7 1 1 3 2.5 -0.5 Natural gas 58 36 35 60 98 113 3 13 53 9.8 5.8 Final consumption 752 1 066 1 110 1 220 1 298 1 173 100 100 100 1.4 0.3 Coal 383 492 514 551 576 519 46 44 44 1.0 0.0 Oil 358 543 564 622 660 560 51 51 48 1.4 -0.0 Transport 190 298 309 358 391 350 28 30 30 2.2 0.6 Natural gas 12 31 32 47 63 94 3 5 8 6.3 5.2 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 402Table A.3: Energy demand – Japan 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 501 426 415 388 380 353 100 100 100 -0.8 -0.8 Coal 115 114 110 97 83 71 26 22 20 -2.5 -2.0 Oil 203 166 160 145 130 100 39 34 28 -1.9 -2.2 Natural gas 86 97 89 77 71 73 22 19 21 -2.1 -1.0 Nuclear 75 17 22 31 55 57 5 14 16 8.5 4.6 Hydro 7 7 7 8 8 8 2 2 2 1.2 0.8 Bioenergy 12 16 18 18 19 22 4 5 6 0.8 1.0 Other renewables 3 9 9 13 14 22 2 4 6 4.8 4.6 Power sector 233 189 184 172 176 177 100 100 100 -0.4 -0.2 Coal 64 70 67 58 47 40 36 27 22 -3.1 -2.4 Oil 20 11 7 6 4 1 4 2 1 -6.2 -7.9 Natural gas 58 67 62 46 38 36 34 21 20 -4.4 -2.5 Nuclear 75 17 22 31 55 57 12 31 32 8.5 4.6 Hydro 7 7 7 8 8 8 4 4 5 1.2 0.8 Bioenergy 6 9 11 11 12 14 6 7 8 0.9 1.3 Other renewables 3 8 8 12 13 20 4 8 12 4.6 4.4 Other energy sector 54 45 43 38 34 30 100 100 100 -1.9 -1.7 Electricity 11 9 9 8 8 7 20 22 25 -1.0 -0.8 Total final consumption 315 283 276 265 256 235 100 100 100 -0.7 -0.8 Coal 23 21 21 18 17 15 7 7 6 -1.8 -1.5 Oil 167 144 142 130 120 95 51 47 41 -1.5 -1.9 Natural gas 29 29 28 31 32 34 10 13 14 1.3 0.9 Electricity 89 81 79 78 78 80 28 31 34 -0.0 0.1 Heat 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0.2 -0.0 Bioenergy 6 6 6 7 7 7 2 3 3 0.8 0.6 Other renewables 1 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 1 9.1 7.4 Industry 92 83 81 79 75 69 100 100 100 -0.6 -0.7 Coal 22 20 20 18 17 15 24 22 21 -1.4 -1.3 Oil 24 18 17 17 15 12 21 21 18 -1.0 -1.5 Natural gas 11 11 11 13 13 13 14 17 19 1.4 0.7 Electricity 33 30 29 26 25 24 35 34 35 -1.2 -0.8 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 3 4 4 4 4 5 5 6 7 1.1 0.7 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 37.8 22.7 Transport 79 71 69 61 56 46 100 100 100 -2.0 -2.0 Oil 77 69 67 58 52 38 97 93 84 -2.4 -2.6 Electricity 2 2 1 2 3 5 2 5 10 6.8 5.8 Bioenergy 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 2 4.0 3.8 Other fuels 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 3 22.8 18.0 Buildings 103 91 88 89 90 88 100 100 100 0.2 -0.0 Coal 0 0 0 - - - 0 - - n.a.
Oil 28 21 21 20 18 13 24 20 15 -1.1 -2.1 Natural gas 18 17 16 17 19 20 19 21 23 1.3 1.1 Electricity 55 50 48 49 50 51 55 55 58 0.3 0.3 Heat 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0.2 -0.0 Bioenergy 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 -0.8 -1.0 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 7.0 6.0 Other 41 38 38 36 35 32 100 100 100 -0.8 -0.8 Petrochem.
Feedstock 30 29 29 26 26 24 77 74 75 -1.0 -0.9 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 403Table A.3: Energy demand – Japan A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 501 426 415 373 344 301 100 100 100 -1.7 -1.5 Coal 115 114 110 73 40 29 26 12 10 -8.8 -6.2 Oil 203 166 160 135 110 61 39 32 20 -3.4 -4.5 Natural gas 86 97 89 81 81 61 22 24 20 -0.9 -1.8 Nuclear 75 17 22 41 60 72 5 17 24 9.4 5.7 Hydro 7 7 7 8 9 10 2 3 3 2.4 1.7 Bioenergy 12 16 18 20 21 24 4 6 8 1.8 1.4 Other renewables 3 9 9 15 23 46 2 7 15 9.4 8.3 Power sector 233 189 184 167 163 170 100 100 100 -1.1 -0.4 Coal 64 70 67 36 8 5 36 5 3 -17.6 -11.5 Oil 20 11 7 5 2 1 4 1 0 -9.5 -10.7 Natural gas 58 67 62 52 51 28 34 32 16 -1.6 -3.7 Nuclear 75 17 22 41 60 72 12 37 42 9.4 5.7 Hydro 7 7 7 8 9 10 4 5 6 2.4 1.7 Bioenergy 6 9 11 12 13 15 6 8 9 1.8 1.6 Other renewables 3 8 8 13 20 40 4 12 24 8.3 7.8 Other energy sector 54 45 43 37 32 28 100 100 100 -2.5 -1.9 Electricity 11 9 9 8 7 8 20 22 27 -1.7 -0.6 Total final consumption 315 283 276 253 231 186 100 100 100 -1.6 -1.9 Coal 23 21 21 17 15 11 7 6 6 -2.9 -3.0 Oil 167 144 142 122 101 58 51 44 31 -3.1 -4.2 Natural gas 29 29 28 28 27 21 10 12 12 -0.2 -1.2 Electricity 89 81 79 76 75 75 28 33 40 -0.4 -0.2 Heat 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 -0.7 -0.9 Bioenergy 6 6 6 7 8 8 2 3 4 2.0 1.2 Other renewables 1 0 0 2 3 6 0 1 3 22.2 14.1 Industry 92 83 81 75 68 57 100 100 100 -1.6 -1.6 Coal 22 20 20 17 15 11 24 22 19 -2.6 -2.8 Oil 24 18 17 15 12 8 21 18 14 -3.1 -3.6 Natural gas 11 11 11 12 12 10 14 17 17 0.3 -0.8 Electricity 33 30 29 26 24 24 35 36 41 -1.5 -0.9 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 3 4 4 4 4 4 5 6 8 0.6 0.6 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 2 55.1 28.7 Transport 79 71 69 59 51 33 100 100 100 -2.8 -3.5 Oil 77 69 67 56 44 18 97 86 57 -3.9 -6.0 Electricity 2 2 1 2 4 8 2 8 25 9.7 8.5 Bioenergy 0 0 0 1 2 2 1 4 6 14.0 7.6 Other fuels 0 0 0 0 1 4 0 2 12 33.1 24.3 Buildings 103 91 88 84 80 67 100 100 100 -0.9 -1.3 Coal 0 0 0 - - - 0 - - n.a.
Oil 28 21 21 17 13 4 24 16 6 -4.1 -7.6 Natural gas 18 17 16 16 15 11 19 19 17 -0.7 -1.8 Electricity 55 50 48 48 46 43 55 58 64 -0.4 -0.6 Heat 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 -0.7 -0.9 Bioenergy 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 -1.5 -1.5 Traditional biomass - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Other renewables 1 0 0 1 3 5 0 3 7 20.2 13.2 Other 41 38 38 35 33 28 100 100 100 -1.2 -1.4 Petrochem.
Feedstock 30 29 29 26 25 22 77 76 76 -1.4 -1.4 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 404Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Japan 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 1 164 1 050 1 014 996 1 001 1 020 100 100 100 -0.1 0.0 Coal 311 339 323 290 239 202 32 24 20 -2.7 -2.2 Oil 96 52 35 32 18 7 3 2 1 -5.7 -7.5 Natural gas 326 378 346 280 238 238 34 24 23 -3.4 -1.8 Nuclear 288 65 86 120 210 219 8 21 21 8.5 4.6 Renewables 122 198 206 255 278 336 20 28 33 2.8 2.4 Hydro 84 81 80 90 92 96 8 9 9 1.2 0.8 Bioenergy 28 44 52 55 61 71 5 6 7 1.4 1.5 Wind 4 7 7 16 29 50 1 3 5 13.1 9.5 Geothermal 3 3 2 3 3 7 0 0 1 3.2 5.5 Solar PV 4 63 64 91 93 107 6 9 10 3.5 2.5 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 282 331 331 346 342 360 100 100 100 0.3 0.4 Coal 49 50 51 50 41 36 15 12 10 -1.9 -1.6 Oil 54 39 35 20 12 5 11 3 1 -9.4 -9.1 Natural gas 70 84 84 79 77 72 26 23 20 -0.8 -0.8 Nuclear 49 38 33 34 30 28 10 9 8 -0.9 -0.8 Renewables 60 118 126 162 179 215 38 52 60 3.2 2.6 Hydro 48 50 50 51 51 52 15 15 14 0.2 0.2 Bioenergy 6 8 9 11 12 15 3 4 4 3.4 2.6 Wind 2 3 4 8 12 19 1 4 5 11.2 8.0 Geothermal 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1.4 4.3 Solar PV 4 56 63 92 103 125 19 30 35 4.5 3.3 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 112 1 044 993 878 765 646 100 100 100 -2.3 -2.0 Coal 422 431 414 366 310 265 42 41 41 -2.6 -2.1 Oil 484 384 367 331 289 214 37 38 33 -2.1 -2.5 Natural gas 207 228 212 182 166 166 21 22 26 -2.2 -1.2 Power sector 489 501 463 385 309 264 100 100 100 -3.6 -2.6 Coal 290 308 295 256 209 175 64 68 66 -3.1 -2.4 Oil 62 34 23 21 12 4 5 4 2 -6.2 -7.9 Natural gas 136 158 145 107 88 85 31 29 32 -4.4 -2.5 Final consumption 578 507 495 464 431 360 100 100 100 -1.3 -1.5 Coal 112 105 102 93 86 77 20 20 21 -1.5 -1.3 Oil 399 335 329 299 269 204 66 62 57 -1.8 -2.2 Transport 228 204 201 174 154 115 41 36 32 -2.4 -2.6 Natural gas 67 68 65 72 75 79 13 18 22 1.4 0.9 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 405Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Japan A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 1 164 1 050 1 014 975 958 961 100 100 100 -0.5 -0.3 Coal 311 339 323 179 39 22 32 4 2 -17.4 -12.1 Oil 96 52 35 24 12 4 3 1 0 -9.0 -10.4 Natural gas 326 378 346 328 334 183 34 35 19 -0.3 -3.0 Nuclear 288 65 86 158 229 275 8 24 29 9.4 5.7 Renewables 122 198 206 267 324 459 20 34 48 4.2 3.9 Hydro 84 81 80 92 104 113 8 11 12 2.4 1.7 Bioenergy 28 44 52 59 63 72 5 7 7 1.8 1.6 Wind 4 7 7 19 43 112 1 5 12 17.4 13.8 Geothermal 3 3 2 4 8 21 0 1 2 11.7 10.9 Solar PV 4 63 64 93 105 134 6 11 14 4.6 3.6 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 282 331 331 347 359 410 100 100 100 0.8 1.0 Coal 49 50 51 43 31 17 15 9 4 -4.4 -5.1 Oil 54 39 35 20 11 4 11 3 1 -9.6 -9.6 Natural gas 70 84 84 79 73 65 26 20 16 -1.4 -1.2 Nuclear 49 38 33 34 33 35 10 9 9 -0.1 0.3 Renewables 60 118 126 170 210 284 38 58 69 4.7 3.9 Hydro 48 50 50 52 57 60 15 16 15 1.2 0.8 Bioenergy 6 8 9 11 13 14 3 4 4 3.6 2.5 Wind 2 3 4 9 18 40 1 5 10 15.2 11.9 Geothermal 1 0 1 1 2 4 0 0 1 9.9 9.7 Solar PV 4 56 63 96 121 164 19 34 40 6.1 4.6 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 112 1 044 993 754 534 266 100 100 100 -5.5 -6.1 Coal 422 431 414 260 116 52 42 22 20 -10.9 -9.4 Oil 484 384 367 302 232 104 37 44 39 -4.1 -5.8 Natural gas 207 228 212 192 186 113 21 35 42 -1.2 -3.0 Power sector 489 501 463 296 156 66 100 100 100 -9.4 -8.9 Coal 290 308 295 157 28 2 64 18 3 -19.2 -20.7 Oil 62 34 23 16 8 2 5 5 3 -9.5 -10.7 Natural gas 136 158 145 123 120 61 31 77 93 -1.7 -4.0 Final consumption 578 507 495 429 354 189 100 100 100 -3.0 -4.5 Coal 112 105 102 88 74 43 20 21 23 -2.8 -4.0 Oil 399 335 329 275 216 98 66 61 52 -3.7 -5.6 Transport 228 204 201 166 130 55 41 37 29 -3.9 -6.0 Natural gas 67 68 65 66 63 48 13 18 25 -0.2 -1.4 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 406Table A.3: Energy demand – Southeast Asia 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 540 683 708 816 932 1 125 100 100 100 2.5 2.2 Coal 86 154 172 191 220 268 24 24 24 2.2 2.1 Oil 191 243 246 284 312 343 35 33 30 2.2 1.6 Natural gas 125 141 143 182 211 268 20 23 24 3.6 3.0 Nuclear - - - - - 3 - - 0 n.a.
Hydro 7 16 17 15 21 29 2 2 3 2.1 2.6 Bioenergy 107 95 95 93 100 114 13 11 10 0.5 0.9 Other renewables 25 34 36 50 68 100 5 7 9 6.1 5.0 Power sector 165 256 275 321 378 483 100 100 100 2.9 2.7 Coal 48 112 125 139 162 198 46 43 41 2.3 2.2 Oil 15 8 8 7 6 5 3 2 1 -2.4 -2.4 Natural gas 67 70 73 96 103 121 27 27 25 3.2 2.4 Nuclear - - - - - 3 - - 1 n.a.
Hydro 7 16 17 15 21 29 6 6 6 2.1 2.6 Bioenergy 3 16 16 15 19 30 6 5 6 1.4 2.9 Other renewables 25 34 36 50 67 98 13 18 20 5.9 4.9 Other energy sector 53 57 57 69 83 102 100 100 100 3.4 2.8 Electricity 7 12 13 16 19 24 23 22 24 3.0 2.9 Total final consumption 382 465 477 549 620 745 100 100 100 2.4 2.1 Coal 40 41 46 51 57 67 10 9 9 2.0 1.8 Oil 166 223 226 260 284 312 47 46 42 2.1 1.5 Natural gas 29 46 46 58 73 106 10 12 14 4.3 4.1 Electricity 52 82 88 107 131 182 18 21 24 3.7 3.5 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 94 73 72 72 74 77 15 12 10 0.3 0.3 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 45.8 27.1 Industry 123 163 172 201 233 289 100 100 100 2.8 2.5 Coal 39 38 43 48 54 64 25 23 22 2.1 1.8 Oil 24 26 26 28 30 32 15 13 11 1.2 0.9 Natural gas 20 38 37 49 62 90 22 26 31 4.7 4.3 Electricity 22 37 40 49 58 73 23 25 25 3.5 3.0 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 18 24 25 27 29 30 15 12 11 1.2 0.9 Other renewables - - - 0 0 0 - 0 0 n.a.
Transport 89 135 138 165 184 209 100 100 100 2.7 2.0 Oil 85 127 129 153 168 183 94 91 87 2.4 1.7 Electricity 0 0 0 1 2 5 0 1 2 16.7 13.3 Bioenergy 1 6 6 9 12 17 4 6 8 6.0 5.1 Other fuels 2 2 2 2 2 4 2 1 2 0.8 2.9 Buildings 123 110 111 115 128 158 100 100 100 1.3 1.7 Coal 2 2 3 2 2 2 2 2 1 -0.9 -0.8 Oil 16 20 21 20 21 22 19 16 14 -0.1 0.2 Natural gas 0 0 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 20.4 13.7 Electricity 30 44 47 56 70 103 43 55 65 3.6 3.8 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 75 43 40 35 33 27 36 26 17 -1.8 -1.8 Traditional biomass 74 42 39 34 32 26 35 25 16 -1.9 -2.0 Other renewables 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 39.1 23.9 Other 48 56 57 68 76 89 100 100 100 2.6 2.1 Petrochem.
Feedstock 34 40 40 48 53 64 71 71 72 2.6 2.2 Stated Policies Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 407Table A.3: Energy demand – Southeast Asia A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total primary demand 540 683 708 766 818 897 100 100 100 1.3 1.1 Coal 86 154 172 164 119 55 24 15 6 -3.3 -5.3 Oil 191 243 246 265 265 218 35 32 24 0.7 -0.6 Natural gas 125 141 143 162 187 217 20 23 24 2.5 2.0 Nuclear - - - - - 4 - - 0 n.a.
Hydro 7 16 17 19 28 46 2 3 5 4.8 5.0 Bioenergy 107 95 95 85 80 99 13 10 11 -1.5 0.2 Other renewables 25 34 36 71 139 258 5 17 29 13.2 9.9 Power sector 165 256 275 308 349 445 100 100 100 2.2 2.3 Coal 48 112 125 118 73 15 46 21 3 -4.7 -9.7 Oil 15 8 8 4 3 2 3 1 0 -9.7 -5.9 Natural gas 67 70 73 79 85 86 27 24 19 1.4 0.8 Nuclear - - - - - 4 - - 1 n.a.
Hydro 7 16 17 19 28 46 6 8 10 4.8 5.0 Bioenergy 3 16 16 17 24 41 6 7 9 3.6 4.5 Other renewables 25 34 36 70 136 251 13 39 56 13.0 9.7 Other energy sector 53 57 57 69 81 97 100 100 100 3.3 2.6 Electricity 7 12 13 15 16 20 23 20 21 1.9 1.9 Total final consumption 382 465 477 509 526 538 100 100 100 0.9 0.6 Coal 40 41 46 46 45 39 10 9 7 -0.2 -0.8 Oil 166 223 226 245 243 195 47 46 36 0.7 -0.7 Natural gas 29 46 46 51 59 72 10 11 13 2.4 2.2 Electricity 52 82 88 103 122 169 18 23 31 3.0 3.1 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 94 73 72 61 50 52 15 9 10 -3.3 -1.6 Other renewables 0 0 0 1 3 7 0 0 1 62.3 35.1 Industry 123 163 172 186 196 210 100 100 100 1.2 1.0 Coal 39 38 43 43 43 38 25 22 18 -0.1 -0.6 Oil 24 26 26 25 24 19 15 12 9 -1.0 -1.5 Natural gas 20 38 37 45 52 62 22 26 30 3.0 2.5 Electricity 22 37 40 48 54 66 23 27 31 2.9 2.4 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 18 24 25 24 23 2 0 15 12 10 -0.7 -1.0 Other renewables - - - 0 1 4 - 1 2 n.a.
Transport 89 135 138 158 162 138 100 100 100 1.5 -0.0 Oil 85 127 129 142 138 92 94 85 67 0.6 -1.6 Electricity 0 0 0 1 5 21 0 3 15 25.6 21.1 Bioenergy 1 6 6 12 17 20 4 10 15 9.6 5.9 Other fuels 2 2 2 2 3 4 2 2 3 1.8 3.1 Buildings 123 110 111 100 96 114 100 100 100 -1.3 0.1 Coal 2 2 3 2 1 1 2 2 1 -5.0 -6.8 Oil 16 20 21 20 21 18 19 22 16 -0.1 -0.6 Natural gas 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 1 2 16.8 10.9 Electricity 30 44 47 53 63 81 43 66 72 2.6 2.6 Heat - - - - - - - - - n.a.
Bioenergy 75 43 40 23 8 9 36 9 8 -13.4 -7.1 Traditional biomass 74 42 39 19 - - 35 - - n.a.
Other renewables 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 1 2 50.1 28.9 Other 48 56 57 65 71 77 100 100 100 2.1 1.5 Petrochem.
Feedstock 34 40 40 45 51 57 71 71 74 2.1 1.7 Sustainable Development Scenario Energy demand (Mtoe) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 408Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Southeast Asia 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 684 1 101 1 183 1 432 1 741 2 399 100 100 100 3.6 3.4 Coal 185 457 510 588 700 928 43 40 39 2.9 2.9 Oil 60 20 19 18 18 15 2 1 1 -0.8 -1.3 Natural gas 335 366 383 524 581 725 32 33 30 3.9 3.1 Nuclear - - - - - 12 - - 0 n.a.
Renewables 104 258 270 302 442 719 23 25 30 4.6 4.8 Hydro 78 190 195 180 245 337 16 14 14 2.1 2.6 Bioenergy 6 33 35 31 45 83 3 3 3 2.4 4.2 Wind 0 3 5 20 31 65 0 2 3 18.8 13.3 Geothermal 19 24 25 38 54 77 2 3 3 7.1 5.4 Solar PV 0 7 11 33 67 158 1 4 7 18.1 13.6 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 164 262 278 366 454 660 100 100 100 4.6 4.2 Coal 33 75 81 106 123 169 29 27 26 3.9 3.6 Oil 25 25 25 22 21 15 9 5 2 -1.8 -2.6 Natural gas 72 97 98 123 142 194 35 31 29 3.4 3.3 Nuclear - - - - - 2 - - 0 n.a.
Renewables 35 65 74 112 165 273 26 36 41 7.6 6.4 Hydro 26 46 47 56 77 104 17 17 16 4.5 3.8 Bioenergy 5 8 8 10 12 17 3 3 3 3.3 3.4 Wind 0 2 3 9 13 27 1 3 4 15.9 11.7 Geothermal 3 4 4 6 8 11 1 2 2 6.1 4.9 Solar PV 0 5 11 31 55 115 4 12 17 15.5 11.6 CSP - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 Marine - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 78.2 35.4 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 072 1 483 1 571 1 804 2 039 2 396 100 100 100 2.4 2.0 Coal 358 617 691 765 883 1 070 44 43 45 2.3 2.1 Oil 455 581 589 664 722 778 37 35 32 1.9 1.3 Natural gas 259 285 292 376 434 548 19 21 23 3.7 3.0 Power sector 398 642 702 804 912 1 097 100 100 100 2.4 2.2 Coal 195 453 505 559 651 799 72 71 73 2.3 2.2 Oil 46 26 25 21 19 15 4 2 1 -2.4 -2.4 Natural gas 157 164 172 224 242 283 25 27 26 3.2 2.4 Final consumption 609 773 802 920 1 028 1 181 100 100 100 2.3 1.9 Coal 163 164 186 205 232 271 23 23 23 2.0 1.8 Oil 394 540 548 624 680 737 68 66 62 2.0 1.4 Transport 256 381 387 458 504 547 48 49 46 2.4 1.7 Natural gas 52 69 69 90 116 174 9 11 15 4.8 4.5 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Stated Policies Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Stated Policies ScenarioStated Policies Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 409Table A.3: Electricity and CO2 emissions – Southeast Asia A2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total generation 684 1 101 1 183 1 380 1 616 2 199 100 100 100 2.9 3.0 Coal 185 457 510 493 308 61 43 19 3 -4.5 -9.6 Oil 60 20 19 12 8 7 2 0 0 -7.7 -4.7 Natural gas 335 366 383 440 475 501 32 29 23 2.0 1.3 Nuclear - - - - - 16 - - 1 n.a.
Renewables 104 258 270 435 825 1 614 23 51 73 10.7 8.9 Hydro 78 190 195 223 327 537 16 20 24 4.8 5.0 Bioenergy 6 33 35 39 62 123 3 4 6 5.4 6.2 Wind 0 3 5 36 135 326 0 8 15 35.7 22.4 Geothermal 19 24 25 55 111 202 2 7 9 14.5 10.4 Solar PV 0 7 11 82 191 425 1 12 19 29.8 19.1 CSP - - - - - - - - - n.a.
2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total capacity 164 262 278 426 588 887 100 100 100 7.1 5.7 Coal 33 75 81 98 92 57 29 16 6 1.2 -1.6 Oil 25 25 25 22 21 13 9 4 1 -1.9 -3.1 Natural gas 72 97 98 123 131 135 35 22 15 2.7 1.5 Nuclear - - - - - 3 - - 0 n.a.
Renewables 35 65 74 182 342 668 26 58 75 15.0 11.1 Hydro 26 46 47 72 103 167 17 18 19 7.4 6.2 Bioenergy 5 8 8 12 15 25 3 3 3 5.6 5.2 Wind 0 2 3 17 61 140 1 10 16 33.1 20.9 Geothermal 3 4 4 9 17 29 1 3 3 13.8 9.8 Solar PV 0 5 11 72 145 306 4 25 35 26.1 17.0 CSP - 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 Marine - 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 94.7 63.6 2010 2018 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 Total CO 2 1 072 1 483 1 571 1 604 1 427 994 100 100 100 -0.9 -2.2 Coal 358 617 691 657 466 171 44 33 17 -3.5 -6.4 Oil 455 581 589 611 592 427 37 41 43 0.0 -1.5 Natural gas 259 285 292 336 370 398 19 26 40 2.2 1.5 Power sector 398 642 702 672 502 247 100 100 100 -3.0 -4.8 Coal 195 453 505 474 294 39 72 59 16 -4.8 -11.5 Oil 46 26 25 14 8 7 4 2 3 -9.6 -5.9 Natural gas 157 164 172 185 200 202 25 40 81 1.4 0.8 Final consumption 609 773 802 847 835 654 100 100 100 0.4 -1.0 Coal 163 164 186 183 172 132 23 21 20 -0.7 -1.6 Oil 394 540 548 579 564 404 68 68 62 0.3 -1.4 Transport 256 381 387 424 414 277 48 50 42 0.6 -1.6 Natural gas 52 69 69 85 98 118 9 12 18 3.3 2.6 Electrical capacity (GW) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario CO 2 emissions (Mt) Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioSustainable Development Scenario Electricity generation (TWh) Shares (%) CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 410Table A.4: Emissions of air pollutants – World 2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 SO 2 emissions from all energy activities (Mt) Total 54.7 46.9 43.8 44.4 100 100 100 -2.0 -1.0 Power 19.8 14.5 11.5 11.3 36 26 25 -4.8 -2.6 Industry* 24.4 24.1 24.4 25.9 45 56 58 -0.0 0.3 Transport 5.1 3.7 3.9 4.2 9 9 9 -2.5 -1.0 Buildings 4.3 3.5 3.0 2.1 8 7 5 -3.4 -3.4 Agriculture 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.0 2 3 2 0.3 -0.5 NO X emissions from all energy activities (Mt) Total 100.2 93.5 90.4 91.8 100 100 100 -0.9 -0.4 Power 14.4 12.4 11.7 11.0 14 13 12 -1.9 -1.3 Industry* 22.4 22.8 23.4 26.3 22 26 29 0.4 0.8 Transport 55.7 51.2 48.3 47.8 56 53 52 -1.3 -0.7 Buildings 4.6 4.5 4.4 4.2 5 5 5 -0.4 -0.4 Agriculture 3.0 2.6 2.5 2.5 3 3 3 -1.7 -0.9 PM 2.5 emissions from all energy activities (Mt) Total 27.8 26.5 25.5 24.6 100 100 100 -0.8 -0.6 Power 1.8 1.4 1.2 1.2 7 5 5 -3.5 -2.1 Industry* 7.2 7.6 8.0 9.4 26 31 38 0.9 1.3 Transport 3.7 3.2 3.0 3.2 13 12 13 -1.9 -0.7 Buildings 14.3 13.5 12.5 10.0 51 49 41 -1.2 -1.7 Agriculture 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 3 3 3 -0.1 0.2 * Industry also includes other transformation.
2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 SO 2 emissions from combustion activities (Mt) Total 40.1 31.8 28.3 27.7 100 100 100 -3.1 -1.7 Coal 23.1 17.7 14.2 13.2 58 50 48 -4.3 -2.6 Oil 14.8 11.6 11.4 11.1 37 40 40 -2.3 -1.4 Natural gas 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 1 1 2 1.5 1.8 Bioenergy 1.9 2.2 2.4 3.0 5 8 11 1.8 2.0 NO X emissions from combustion activities (Mt) Total 90.5 83.1 79.4 79.3 100 100 100 -1.2 -0.6 Coal 12.3 10.0 9.3 8.2 14 12 10 -2.5 -1.9 Oil 65.5 59.5 56.2 55.3 72 71 70 -1.4 -0.8 Natural gas 9.1 9.4 9.6 11.0 10 12 14 0.5 0.9 Bioenergy 3.7 4.1 4.4 4.8 4 6 6 1.5 1.3 PM 2.5 emissions from combustion activities (Mt) Total 22.2 20.3 18.8 16.6 100 100 100 -1.5 -1.4 Coal 3.5 2.8 2.4 1.9 16 13 11 -3.5 -2.9 Oil 4.5 3.9 3.5 3.6 20 19 22 -2.2 -1.1 Natural gas 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 1 1 1 1.6 1.6 Bioenergy 14.0 13.5 12.7 10.9 63 68 66 -0.8 -1.2 Emissions of air pollutants - World Shares (%) By fuel Shares (%)By energy sectorStated Policies Scenario Stated Policies Scenario CAAGR (%)CAAGR (%) IEA.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 411Table A.4: Emissions of air pollutants – World A2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 SO 2 emissions from all energy activities (Mt) Total 54.7 36.3 26.0 13.4 100 100 100 -6.5 -6.5 Power 19.8 8.9 4.2 1.6 36 16 12 -13.1 -11.2 Industry* 24.4 20.5 16.7 9.3 45 64 70 -3.4 -4.5 Transport 5.1 3.3 2.9 1.7 9 11 13 -4.9 -5.1 Buildings 4.3 2.8 1.6 0.6 8 6 4 -8.5 -9.1 Agriculture 1.1 0.8 0.6 0.1 2 2 1 -5.7 -9.3 NO X emissions from all energy activities (Mt) Total 100.2 81.0 61.5 27.2 100 100 100 -4.3 -6.0 Power 14.4 9.1 6.0 2.7 14 10 10 -7.6 -7.6 Industry* 22.4 18.5 14.5 7.6 22 24 28 -3.8 -5.0 Transport 55.7 47.5 37.1 15.1 56 60 56 -3.6 -6.0 Buildings 4.6 3.5 2.4 1.5 5 4 6 -5.6 -5.1 Agriculture 3.0 2.3 1.5 0.2 3 2 1 -6.4 -11.3 PM 2.5 emissions from all energy activities (Mt) Total 27.8 18.4 10.4 3.9 100 100 100 -8.6 -9.0 Power 1.8 0.9 0.5 0.1 7 5 3 -11.2 -12.1 Industry* 7.2 6.2 4.7 1.7 26 46 43 -3.8 -6.8 Transport 3.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 13 23 32 -4.2 -5.1 Buildings 14.3 7.7 2.3 0.7 51 22 17 -15.3 -13.5 Agriculture 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.2 3 5 4 -3.5 -6.9 * Industry also includes other transformation.
2019 2025 2030 2040 2019 2030 2040 2019-30 2019-40 SO 2 emissions from combustion activities (Mt) Total 40.1 23.0 14.7 7.0 100 100 100 -8.7 -8.0 Coal 23.1 12.0 6.3 2.0 58 43 29 -11.1 -11.0 Oil 14.8 8.8 6.4 2.7 37 43 38 -7.4 -7.8 Natural gas 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 1 2 5 1.3 0.8 Bioenergy 1.9 1.8 1.7 1.9 5 11 28 -1.4 0.0 NO X emissions from combustion activities (Mt) Total 90.5 72.4 54.3 23.2 100 100 100 -4.5 -6.3 Coal 12.3 7.1 4.3 1.6 14 8 7 -9.1 -9.2 Oil 65.5 54.3 41.4 16.0 72 76 69 -4.1 -6.5 Natural gas 9.1 7.7 5.9 2.9 10 11 12 -3.8 -5.3 Bioenergy 3.7 3.3 2.7 2.6 4 5 11 -2.7 -1.6 PM 2.5 emissions from combustion activities (Mt) Total 22.2 13.2 6.0 1.8 100 100 100 -11.2 -11.4 Coal 3.5 2.1 1.1 0.2 16 18 10 -10.0 -13.5 Oil 4.5 3.4 2.4 0.8 20 40 43 -5.6 -8.1 Natural gas 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 1 2 5 -1.2 -1.8 Bioenergy 14.0 7.6 2.4 0.7 63 40 42 -14.8 -13.0 By fuel Shares (%) CAAGR (%)Sustainable Development ScenarioEmissions of air pollutants - World By energy sector Shares (%) CAAGR (%) Sustainable Development Scenario IEA.
All rights reserved.World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 412Table A.5: Energy investment World investments (billion dollars, 2019) Fuels 881 869 881 875 9 564 8 811 18 375 Oil and natural gas 781 800 809 804 8 805 8 085 16 890 Coal 91 49 37 43 544 369 913 Biofuels and biogases 9 20 36 27 216 356 572 Power 778 884 1 073 974 9 721 10 733 20 454 Generation 482 478 522 499 5 254 5 215 10 469 Fossil fuels 139 86 78 82 944 784 1 728 Nuclear 34 52 47 50 574 471 1 045 Renewables 310 340 396 366 3 736 3 960 7 696 Electricity networks 294 393 517 452 4 328 5 165 9 493 Battery storage 3 13 35 23 139 353 492 Fuels and power 1 659 1 753 1 954 1 849 19 285 19 544 38 829 Energy efficiency 251 364 537 446 4 000 5 371 9 371 Renewables and other 30 211 385 294 2 316 3 850 6 166 End-use 281 574 922 740 6 316 9 221 15 537 Total 1 940 2 327 2 877 2 589 25 601 28 765 54 366 Fuels Oil Gas Cumulative investments, 2020-2040 (billion dollars, 2019) North America 3 658 156 606 129 4 548 4 710 Central & South America 1 318 100 90 33 1 542 1 664 Europe 891 13 323 69 1 296 1 480 Africa 1 281 57 183 52 1 573 1 616 Middle East 1 822 217 312 133 2 485 2 487 Eurasia 1 831 47 328 36 2 242 2 310 Asia Pacific 1 698 63 689 359 2 809 3 671 Shipping n.a.
395 438 World 12 499 921 2 659 811 16 890 18 375 Power Cumulative investments, 2020-2040 (billion dollars, 2019) North America 67 256 10 333 144 1 187 1 664 1 051 2 810 Central & South America 4 46 3 53 29 411 493 476 974 Europe 76 142 6 223 334 1 487 2 044 2 055 4 189 Africa 46 59 10 115 23 525 663 693 1 375 Middle East 7 124 12 143 31 214 387 250 641 Eurasia 68 119 2 189 90 136 415 245 664 Asia Pacific 416 244 12 672 394 3 737 4 803 4 722 9 801 World 683 990 54 1 728 1 045 7 696 10 469 9 493 20 454Stated Policies Scenario Average annual TotalStated Policies Scenario20202040201520192031204020202040202020302020203020312040 Cumulative Fossil fuelsGeneration NetworksUpstream oil & gasRefining oilOil & gasTransportation Stated Policies Scenario Total Coal Gas Oil Nuclear Renew.
All rights reserved.Annex A | Tables for scenario projections 413Table A.5: Energy investment AWorld investments (billion dollars, 2019) Fuels 881 694 561 631 7 631 5 615 13 246 Oil and natural gas 781 628 464 550 6 909 4 638 11 547 Coal 91 23 18 20 249 178 426 Biofuels and biogases 9 43 80 61 473 799 1 273 Power 778 1 142 1 669 1 393 12 564 16 686 29 250 Generation 482 684 783 731 7 526 7 834 15 360 Fossil fuels 139 62 58 60 682 579 1 260 Nuclear 34 53 59 56 587 593 1 180 Renewables 310 569 666 615 6 258 6 662 12 920 Electricity networks 294 437 829 623 4 803 8 286 13 089 Battery storage 3 21 57 38 235 566 802 Fuels and power 1 659 1 836 2 230 2 024 20 195 22 300 42 495 Energy efficiency 251 521 809 658 5 729 8 086 13 815 Renewables and other 30 311 805 546 3 418 8 054 11 472 End-use 281 832 1 614 1 204 9 147 16 140 25 287 Total 1 940 2 668 3 844 3 228 29 343 38 440 67 783 Fuels Oil Gas Cumulative investments, 2020-2040 (billion dollars, 2019) North America 2 533 74 469 81 3 156 3 509 Central & South America 783 28 58 21 889 1 034 Europe 646 10 269 53 979 1 177 Africa 826 30 125 34 1 015 1 062 Middle East 1 230 60 222 66 1 578 1 602 Eurasia 1 256 15 287 31 1 589 1 637 Asia Pacific 1 269 24 555 188 2 036 2 895 Shipping n.a.
304 330 World 8 543 454 2 077 474 11 547 13 246 Power Cumulative investments, 2020-2040 (billion dollars, 2019) North America 38 145 4 187 119 2 129 2 434 1 555 4 171 Central & South America 1 24 3 28 33 577 637 477 1 127 Europe 36 180 3 219 327 2 141 2 687 3 215 6 047 Africa 14 49 25 87 45 981 1 113 929 2 076 Middle East 2 66 7 75 48 748 871 312 1 183 Eurasia 5 88 2 95 113 316 523 201 729 Asia Pacific 273 284 12 570 495 6 030 7 095 6 399 13 917 World 369 835 56 1 260 1 180 12 920 15 360 13 089 29 250Sustainable Development Scenario Coal Gas OilFossil fuelsNuclear Renew.
Generation Networks TotalAverage annual Cumulative Sustainable Development Scenario Upstream oil & gasTransportation Refining oilOil & gasTotalSustainable Development Scenario 20312040202020402015201920202030203120402020204020202030 IEA.
Annex B | Design of the scenarios 415 Annex B Design of the scenarios The World Energy Outlook -2020 ( WEO -2020 ) presents projections for different core scenarios .
Detail s on the assumptions for the State d Policies and the Sustainable Development scenario s are in this annex and include fossil fuel resources, power generation and demand- side technology costs, and energy -related government policies .
The Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS) is designed to give fee dback to decision makers about the course that they are on today , based on stated policy ambitions.
This scenario assumes that the pandemic is brought under control over the course of 2021.
It incorporates our assessment of stated policy ambitions, including the energy components of announced stimulus or recovery packages (as of mid -2020) and the Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement.
Broad energy and environmental objectives (including country net -zero targets) are not automaticall y assumed to be met.
They are implemented in this scenario to the extent that they are backed up by specific policies, funding and measures.
The STEPS also reflects progress with the implementation of corporate sustainability co mmitments.
The Sustainable D evelopment Scenario (SDS) is designed to meet the energy -related United Nations Sustainable Development Goals to achieve: universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy services by 2030; a substantial reduction in air pollution, and effective a ction to combat climate change.
The SDS is fully aligned with the Paris Agreement to hold the rise in global average temperature to "well below 2 °C … and pursuing efforts to limit [it] to 1.5 °C".
The SDS assesses what combination of actions would be required to achieve these objectives .
In this Outlook , investments in the 2021 -23 period are fully aligned with those in Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report (IEA, 2020).
In the SDS, many of the world's advanced economies reach net -zero emissions by 2050, or earlier in some cases, and global carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions are on course to fall to net zero by 2070.
The Net Zero Emissions by 2050 case (NZE2050) was added this year to examine what more would be needed beyond SDS over the next ten years to put global carbon dioxide (CO 2) emissions on a pathway to net zero by 2050.
The NZE2050 is designed for emissions to fall to around 20.1 gigatonnes ( Gt) in 2030.
The IPCC indicates that this would provide a pathway towards a 50% chance of limiting the global average surface temperature rise to 1.5 °C without a large level of net negative emissions globally (IPCC, 2018).
The Delayed Recovery Scenario (DRS ), also new this year, explores the possibility that the health and economic assumptions in the STEPS and the SDS are too optimistic, and prolonged outbreaks of Covid- 19 continue throughout 2021 and beyond.
The DRS sees lower economic activity for longer t han is seen in the STEPS, affecting economic growth, company strategies and consumer behaviour.
The initial energy policy assumptions in the DRS are the same as those in the STEPS.
416 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes B.1 Fossil fuel resources Table B.1 ⊳ Remaining technically recoverable fossil fuel resources, end-2019 Oil (billion barrels) Proven reserves Resources Conventional crude oil Tight oil NGLs EHOB Kerogen oil North America 238 2 422 241 218 163 800 1 000 Central and South America 293 850 245 60 50 494 3 Europe 15 115 59 19 28 3 6 Africa 126 449 308 54 85 2Middle East 834 1 136 903 29 161 14 30 Eurasia 146 951 237 85 59 552 18 Asia Pacific 51 284 126 72 67 3 16 World 1 702 6 208 2 118 536 613 1 868 1 073 Natural gas (trillion cubic metres) Proven reserves Resources Conventional gas Tight gas Shale gas Coalbed methane North America 16 149 50 10 81 7 Central and South America 8 84 28 15 41Europe 5 47 19 5 18 5 Africa 19 101 51 10 40 0 Middle East 81 121 102 9 11Eurasia 77 169 132 10 10 17 Asia Pacific 22 139 45 21 53 20 World 229 810 426 80 254 49 Coal (billion tonnes) Proven reserves Resources Coking coal Steam coal Lignite North America 257 8 389 1 032 5 839 1 519 Central and South America 14 60 3 32 25 Europe 135 979 165 411 403 Africa 15 343 45 297 0 Middle East 1 41 19 23Eurasia 191 2 015 343 1 041 632 Asia Pacific 457 8 954 1 508 6 032 1 413 World 1 070 20 781 3 114 13 675 3 992 Notes : NGLs = natural gas liquids; EHO B = extra -heavy oil and bitumen.
The breakdown of coal resources by type is an IEA estimate.
Coal world resources exclude Antarctica.
Sources: BGR (2019); BP (2020); Cedigaz (2019); OGJ (2019); US DOE/EIA (2019, 2020); US DOE/EIA/ARI (2013, 2015); USGS (2012a, 2012b); IEA databases and analysis.
Annex B | Design of the scenarios 417 B  The World Energy Outlook (WEO) supply modelling relies on estimates of the remaining technically recoverable resource, rather than the (often more widely quoted) n umbers for proven reserves.
Resource estimates are subject to a considerable degree of uncertainty, as well as the distinction in the analysis between conventional and unconventional resource types.
 Overall, the remaining technical recoverable resources o f fossil fuels remain almost unchanged from the World Energy Outlook -2019 (IEA, 2019a), with the exception of a revision downward for coal.
Still, all fuels are at a level comfortably sufficient to meet the projections of global energy demand growth to 204 0 in all scenarios.
 The main adjustment to our estimates of oil resources in this edition comes in the numbers for US tight oil and natural gas liquids ( NGLs ).
Remaining technically recoverable resources of US tight oil (crude plus condensate) in th is Outlook amounts to almost 200 billion barrels, more than 25% higher than the 155 billion barrels in the WEO -2019.
The resources of US NGLs, both conventional and unconventional, increase by about 20% this year to 135 billion barrels.
The se resource numbers are based on the most recent estimate for each play from the US Energy I nformation Administration (US/EIA, 2020).
 In the case of natural gas, the worldwide resource numbers are largely unchanged, with the exception of the US shale gas resources.
These are higher in th is Outlook at 50 trillion cubic metres (tcm), a 16% increase from the level in the WEO -2019 .
 Knowledge of the tight oil resource base continues to evolve and there is increasing understanding of the cost profile of resources between and within shale plays.
While there has been a substantial increase in tight oil and shale resources in this Outlook , many of the additional resources are located in higher cost area s, which tempers the impact on the production projections.
 World coal resources are made up of various types of coal : around 80% is steam and coking coal and the remainder is lignite .
Coal resources are more available in parts of the world without substantial gas and oil resources, notably in Asia.
In this year 's estimates, there is a noticeable decrease in resources in Eurasia, stemming from revisions to the coal resource base in Russia.
418 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes B.2 Power generation technology costs Table B .2a ⊳ Technology costs in selected region s in the Stated Policies Scenario Capital costs ($/kW) Capacity factor (%) Fuel, CO 2 and O&M ($/MWh) LCOE ($/MWh) VALCOE ($/MWh) 2019 2040 2019 2040 2019 2040 2019 2040 2019 2040 United States Nuclear 5 000 4 500 90 90 30 30 105 100 105 100 Coal 2 100 2 100 60 60 25 30 75 75 75 75 Gas CCGT 1 000 1 000 50 50 30 40 55 65 55 65 Solar PV 1 220 680 21 23 10 10 50 30 55 40 Wind onshore 1 560 1 440 42 44 10 10 35 35 40 40 Wind offshore 4 260 2 160 41 48 35 20 115 55 110 60 European Union Nuclear 6 600 4 500 75 75 35 35 150 110 145 115 Coal 2 000 2 000 40 40 70 90 130 150 120 130 Gas CCGT 1 000 1 000 40 40 60 85 90 115 75 80 Solar PV 840 490 13 14 10 10 55 35 60 65 Wind onshore 1 560 1 420 28 31 15 15 55 50 55 60 Wind offshore 3 800 2 040 49 59 15 10 75 40 80 50 China Nuclear 2 600 2 500 80 80 25 25 65 60 65 60 Coal 800 800 60 60 45 60 55 75 55 65 Gas CCGT 560 560 50 50 75 90 85 105 80 95 Solar PV 790 450 17 19 10 5 40 25 40 50 Wind onshore 1 220 1 140 25 27 15 10 50 40 50 45 Wind offshore 3 000 1 640 32 44 25 15 100 45 100 45 India Nuclear 2 800 2 800 80 80 30 30 70 70 70 70 Coal 1 200 1 200 60 60 30 30 55 55 55 50 Gas CCGT 700 700 50 50 60 70 70 85 70 65 Solar PV 610 350 20 21 5 5 35 20 40 45 Wind onshore 1 060 1 020 26 29 10 10 50 45 55 50 Wind offshore 3 140 1 700 29 38 25 15 130 60 130 65 Notes: O&M = operation and maintenance; LCOE = levelised cost of electricity; VALCOE = value- adjusted LCOE; kW = kilowatt; MWh = megawatt- hour; CCGT = combined -cycle gas turbine.
LCOE and VALCOEs figures are rounded.
Lower figures for VALCOE indicate improved competitiveness.
Sources: IEA analysis; IRENA Renewable Costing Alliance; IRENA (2020).
 Major contributors to the LCOE include: overnight capital costs; capacity factor that describes the average output over the year relative to the maximum rated capacity (typica l values provided); the cost of fuel inputs; plus operation and maintenance.
Economic lifetime assumptions are 25 years for solar PV, onshore and offshore wind.
 Weighted average costs of capital (WACC) reflect new analysis for utility -scale solar PV (see C hapter 6, section 6.3.6) and for offshore wind (see Offshore Wind Outlook 2019 [IEA, 2019c]).
Onshore wind was assumed to have the same WACC as utility -scale solar PV.
A standard WACC was assumed for nuclear power, coal - and gas -fired power plants (7-8% ba sed on the stage of economic development).
Annex B | Design of the scenarios 419 B  The value -adjusted LCOE (VALCOE) incorporates information on both costs and the value provided to the system.
Based on the LCOE, estimates of energy, capacity and flexibility value are incorporated to provide a m ore complete metric of competitiveness for power generation technologies (see WEO -2018 , section 8.3.4).
 Fuel, CO 2 and O&M costs reflect the average over the ten years following the indicated date in the projections (and therefore vary by scenario in 2019) .
 The capital costs for nuclear power represent the "nth -of-a-kind" costs for new reactor designs, with substantial cost reductions from the first -of-a-kind projects.
Table B .2b ⊳ Technology costs in selected region s in the Sustainable Development Scenario Capital costs ($/kW) Capacity factor (%) Fuel, CO 2 and O&M ($/MWh) LCOE ($/MWh) 2019 2040 2019 2040 2019 2040 2019 2040 United States Nuclear 5 000 4 500 90 90 30 30 105 100 Coal 2 100 2 100 60 60 65 140 115 185 Gas CCGT 1 000 1 000 50 50 40 70 65 95 Solar PV 1 220 580 21 23 10 10 50 25 Wind onshore 1 560 1 400 42 44 10 10 35 35 Wind offshore 4 260 1 960 41 48 35 15 115 50 European Union Nuclear 6 600 4 500 75 75 35 35 150 110 Coal 2 000 2 000 40 40 95 165 150 225 Gas CCGT 1 000 1 000 40 40 50 75 80 105 Solar PV 840 440 13 14 10 10 55 30 Wind onshore 1 560 1 380 28 31 15 15 55 45 Wind offshore 3 800 1 820 49 59 15 10 75 35 China Nuclear 2 600 2 500 80 80 25 25 65 60 Coal 800 800 60 60 65 140 75 155 Gas CCGT 560 560 50 50 75 110 90 125 Solar PV 790 390 17 19 10 5 40 20 Wind onshore 1 220 1 100 25 27 15 10 50 40 Wind offshore 3 000 1 480 32 44 25 10 100 40 India Nuclear 2 800 2 800 80 80 30 30 70 70 Coal 1 200 1 200 60 60 30 30 55 55 Gas CCGT 700 700 50 50 45 45 60 60 Solar PV 610 310 20 21 5 5 35 15 Wind onshore 1 060 980 26 29 10 10 50 45 Wind offshore 3 140 1 540 29 38 25 15 130 55 Note: O&M = operation and maintenance; LCOE = levelised cost of electricity; kW = kilowatt; MWh = megawatt -hour; CCGT = combined -cycle gas turbine.
Sources: IEA analysis ; IRENA Renewable Costing Alliance; IRENA (2020) .
 Additional cost information and projections for power generation technologies are available at -energy -model/techno -economic -inputs .
420 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes B.3 Key de mand-side technology costs Table B.3 ⊳ Capital costs for selected technologies by scenario Stated Policies Sustainable Development 2020 2025 2030 2040 2020 2025 2030 2040 Buildings Air source heat pumps ($/kW) Advanced economies 624 599 575 519 624 567 528 452 Emerging market and developing economies 331 318 303 274 331 301 282 243 Building retrofit, standard bundle of measures ($/m2) Advanced economies 104 87 79 62 104 86 77 56 Emerging market and developing economies 53 45 43 37 53 44 41 32 Vehicles Hybrid cars ($/vehicle) 15 459 14 396 14 231 13 915 15 459 14 203 13 949 13 699 Battery e lectric cars ($/vehicle) 22 013 16 666 15 461 14 264 22 013 16 300 14 832 13 788 Innovation Hydrogen electrolysers ($/kW) 1 313 680 641 574 1 313 459 384 313 Utility -scale stationary batteries ($/kWh) 375 265 225 184 375 250 208 169 Fuel cells ($/kW) 167 113 98 80 167 107 89 63  All costs represent fully installed/delivered measures, not just technology module costs.
 Building retrofit costs reflect a standard bundle of energy efficiency measures used to improve the building envelope performance of the average existing building stock in 2019 (includes insulation, air sealing, window replacements, and building energy management systems) .
This 2019 benchmark is consistent to reflect the decreasing costs of deploying higher levels of these efficient technologies.
It does not, however, reflect how the average cost of a retrofit increases as the most cost -effective retrofits are completed, making further gains rely on more costly technologies.
 Vehicle costs reflect production costs, not retail prices, to better reflect the cost declines in production, which move independent ly of final marketed prices for electric vehicles to customers.
 Utility -scale stationary battery costs reflect the average installed costs of all battery systems rated to provide max imum power output for a four -hour period.
All rights reserved.Annex B | Design of the scenarios 421 B B.4 Policies The policy actions assumed to be taken by governments are a key variable in this Outlook and the main reason for the differences in outcomes across the scenarios.
An overview of the policies and measures that are considered in the various scenarios is included in Tables B.4 – B.8.
The policies are additive: measures listed under the Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS) supplement those in the Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS).
The tables begin with broad cross -cutting policy frameworks, followed by more detailed policies by sector: power, industry , buildings and transport .
The tables list only the "new policies" enacted, implemented or revised since the publication of the WEO -2019 .
Policies already considered in the previous editions of the WEO are not listed due to space constraints.
However, we do restate SDS policy assumptions that pertain to all regions to be clear on underlying assumptions.
Some regional policies have been included if they play a significant role in shaping energy at a global scale (e.g.
regional carbon markets, standards in very large provinces or states).
The tables do not include all policies and measures , rather they highlight the policies most shaping global energy demand today, while being derived from an exhaustive examination of announcements and plans in countries around the world.
All rights reserved.422 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Table B.4 ⊳ Cross-cutting policy assumptions by scenario for selected regions Scenario Assumptions All regions SDS • Universal access to electricity and clean cooking facilities by 2030.
•Staggered introduction of CO 2 prices (see Table 2.3 in Chapter 2).
•Fossil fuel subsidies phased out by 2025 in net- importing countries and by 2035 in netexporting countries.
•Maximum sulphur content of oil products capped at 1% for heavy fuel oil, 0.1% for gasoil and 10 ppm for gasoline and diesel.
•Policies promoting pro duction and use of alternative fuels and technologies such as hydrogen, biogas, biomethane and CCUS across sectors.
•Investments included in the IEA Sustainable Recovery Plan (IEA, 2020).
United States STEPS • Announcements by states and utilities to raise renewable portfolio standards, including 100% zero carbon electricity targets.
SDS • State -level and company targets for net -zero GHG emissions by 2050 .
European Union STEPS • Partial implementation of G reen New Deal update to NDC s and 203 0 Climate and Energy Framework.
•Investments included in the European Green Deal Investment Plan from Phase 1 (2021 -27).
SDS • Full implementation of Green New Deal update to NDC s and 2030 Climate and Energy Framework, reducing GHG emis sions to 55% below 1990 levels.
•Long -term strategy for c limate neutrality by 2050 .
•Hydrogen Strategy for a Climate Neutral Europe .
Other Europe STEPS • Some implementation of the United Kingdom's target for net -zero GHG emissions by 2050 .
SDS • Full i mplementation of the United Kingdom's target for net-z ero GHG e missions by 2050.
Australia & New Zealand STEPS • Partial implementation of New Zealand's target for net zero, non -biogenic GHG emissions by 2050.
SDS • Full implementation of New Zealand's target for net zero, non -biogenic GHG emissions by 2050 .
Japan STEPS • 5th Strategic Energy Plan under the Basic Act on Energy Policy.
China STEPS • "Made in China 2025" transition from heavy industry to higher value -added manufacturing.
SDS • Peak emissions in advance of the committed 2030 target.
•Announced pledge to strive to be carbon neutral by 2060.
India STEPS • National Mission on Enhanced Energy Efficiency.
•Nearly achieves target of 450 GW of renewables and 60% installed capacity being renewable by 2030.
• " Make in India" campaign to increase the share of manufacturing in the national economy.
SDS • Fully achiev es target of 450 GW of renewables and 60% installed capacity being renewable by 2030.
C & S America STEPS • Chile: Updated NDC; annual GHG emissions of 95 Mt CO2 -eq by 2030; emissions peak by 2025 and a carbon budget for 2020- 2030 of 1 100 Mt CO2 -eq.
Note s: STEPS = Stated Policies Scenario; SDS = Sustainable Development Scenario; C & S America = Central and South America; ppm = parts per million; CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; NDC = Nationally Determined Contributions (Paris Agreement); GHG = greenhouse gases; GW = gigawatts; Mt CO 2eq = million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent.
The policies and measures for the scenarios pertaining to Africa and Southeast Asia can be found within the respective WEO -2019 special reports , Africa Energy Outlook 2019 (IEA, 2019b) and Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2019 (IEA, 2019d) .
Annex B | Design of the scenarios 423 B Table B.5 ⊳ Power sector policies and measures as modelled by scenario for selected regions Scenario Assumptions All regions SDS • Increased deployment of renewables .
• Lifetime extensions of nuclear power plants and some increased new builds, where applicable and with public acceptance.
• Expanded support for the deployment of CCUS.
• Efficiency and emissions standards that prevent the refurbishment of old inefficient plants .
• Stringent pollution emissions limits for industrial facilities above 50 MW th input using solid fuels, set at 200 mg/m3 for SO 2 and NO X, and 30 mg/m3 for PM 2.5.
United States STEPS • Nuclear zero emission credits provided in five states.
• 100% carbon -free electricity targets in eight states plus Puerto Rico and Washington D.C. • Affordable Clean Energy Rule.
European Union STEPS • Emissions Trading System in accordance with 2030 Climate and Energy Framework.
• Endorsed coal phase out plans in 14 member states, notably in Germany, Greece, Hungary and Slovakia.
• Early retirement of all nuclear plants in Germany by end -2022.
Other Europe STEPS • United Kingdom phase out of traditional coal -fired power by 2024.
• United Kingdom O ffshore Wind Sector Deal, with up to 30 GW of offshore wind by 2030.
Korea STEPS • By 2034: renewables reach 40% of installed power capacity.
Japan STEPS • Policy direction to phase out inefficient coal plants to meet the energy mix set out in the 5th Strategic Energy Plan.
China STEPS • 35% share of renewables in total electricity consumption by 2030.
India STEPS • Nearly achieves target of 450 GW of renewables and 60% installed capacity being renewables by 2030.
• National Wind -Solar Hybrid Policy expanded definition of storage technologies for lar gescale wind -solar hybrid power projects.
• "Make in India" programme stimulus funding for renewable energy and batteries.
SDS • Fully achieves target of 450 GW of renewables and 60% installed capacity being renewables by 2030.
Southeast Asia STEPS • Indonesia: 23% share of renewable energy in primary energy supply by 2025 and 31% by 2050 from forthcoming RUPTL 2020- 2029.
• Malaysia, Philippines and Singapore reach capacity installation targets for 2025 and 2030.
• Reach capacity and electricity share targ ets for 2031 in Myanmar, for 2037 in Thailand, and for 2030 in Viet Nam.
Africa STEPS • Implementation of renewable electricity programmes in s ome countries: o South Africa: 2019 Integrated Resource P lan (with Covid -19 delay) .
o Egypt: Wind and solar competitive bidding projects .
• Partial implementation of national electrification strategies .
Notes: CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; MW th = megawatts thermal; mg/m3 = milligrams per cubic metre; RUPTL = Rencana Usaha Penyediaan Tenaga Listr ik, the Indonesian utility's Integrated Resource Plan ; SO 2 = sul phur dioxide; NO X = nitrogen oxides; PM 2.5 = fine particulate matter .
424 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Table B.6 ⊳ Buildings sector policies and measures as modelled by scenario in selected regions Scenario Assumptions All regions SDS • Sustainable Development Goal 7.1: universal access to affordable, reliable and modern energy achieved by 2030.
• Phase out least efficient appliances, light bulbs and heating/ cooling equipment by 2030 at the latest.
• Emissions limits for biomass boilers set at 40 -60 mg/m3 for PM 2.5 and 200 mg/m3 for NO X.
• Introduction of mandatory energy performance standards for all appliances and space cooling equipment.
• Mandatory energy conservation building codes, including net- zero emissions requirement for all new buildings by 2030 at the latest.
• Increased support for energy efficiency and CO 2 emissions reduction measures in existing buildings, including building retrofits, heat pumps, and direct use of solar thermal and geothermal energy in certain economies.
• Digitalisation of buildings electricity demand to increase demand -side response potential through increased flexibility and controllability of end -use devices.
United States STEPS • Updated minimum energy performance standards for central air conditioning and heat pumps.
Canada STEPS • Community efficiency financing (second phase, financing for community energy transitions).
• Appliance efficiency standards.
European Union STEPS • EU recovery plan on green mortgages and revised state aid guidance.
• France: Buildings Environmental regulation RE2020 (strengthened energy efficiency building codes).
• Germany: Replacement bonus for central heating systems ( incentives for clean heating).
Tax deductions for building renovations (retrofit subsidies) .
CO 2 building renovation (retrofit subsidies).
• Italy: Incentives for efficient appliances.
• Estonia: Subsidies for retrofits in apartment buildings.
• Ireland: Community Energy Grant Scheme.
• Portugal: Support programme for sustainable buildings for retrofits in public housing and government buildings.
• Poland: Subsidies for retrofits in the Clean Air Plan.
SDS • EU Energy Performance of Buildings Directive objective to achieve a highly energy efficient and decarbonised building stock by 2050.
Other Europe STEPS • United Kingdom: Public Sector Decarbonisation Scheme and Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund; Green Homes Grants.
• United Kingdom: Low Carbon Heat Support and Heat Networks Investment Project.
• United Kingdom: Scheme for improving buildings efficiency as part of Plan for Jobs.
Australia and New Zealand STEPS • New Zealand: Incentives for clean heating in the Warmer Kiwi Homes programme.
Korea STEPS • Energy audits for older buildings.
• Rebate for purchase of appliances entitled to energy efficiency grade 1.
• Green New Deal in the third supplementary budget proposal.
Annex B | Design of the scenarios 425 B Table B.6 ⊳ Buildings sector policies and measures as modelled by scenario in selected regions (continued) Scenario Assumptions China STEPS • Standard for maximum energy consumption per square metre in buildings.
• Investment in housing renovation as part of a wider industry support package.
• Green and High -Efficiency Cooling Action Plan.
• Minimum performance standards and energy efficiency labelli ng grades for room air conditioners.
India STEPS • India Cooling Action Plan.
Standards and labelling for light commercial air conditioners, freezers and light bulbs.
• Energy efficiency labelling for residential buildings for renters and homeowners to reflect retrofits in prices.
Southeast Asia STEPS • Viet Nam: MEPS and labelling for appliances and lighting in residential and commercial sector.
Central and South America STEPS • Argentina: Strengthened energy efficiency building codes and mandatory efficiency labelling for new social housing.
Africa STEPS • Egypt: MEPS for incandescent lamps.
• Morocco: MEPS and labelling for appliances.
Mandatory energy efficiency audits for servic es.
• Nigeria: MEPS for refrigerators, air conditioners, central heating/cooling systems and space heating.
• Benin: MEPS and energy labelling system for lamps and unit air conditioners.
• Rwanda: MEPS for air conditioners and refrigerators.
Notes: mg/m3 = milligrams per cubic metre; SO 2 = sulphur dioxide; NO X = nitrogen oxides; PM 2.5 = fine particulate matter; MEPS = m inimum energy performance standards .
426 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Table B.7 ⊳ Transport sector policies and measures as modelled by scenario in selected regions Scenario Assumptions All regions SDS • Strong support for electric mobility, alternative fuels and energy efficiency.
• Retail fuel prices kept at a level similar to the STEPS, applying CO 2 taxes across the regions in the IEA's World Energy Model .
• PLDVs: on-road stock e missions intensity limited to 50 g CO 2/km in advanced economies and 65 g CO 2/km elsewhere by 2040.
• Two/three -wheelers: phase out two- stroke engines.
• Light -duty gasoline vehicles: three -way catalysts and tight evaporative controls required.
• Light-duty diesel vehicles: limit emissions to 0.1 g/km NO X and 0.01 g/km PM 2.5.
• Light commercial vehicles: full technology spill- over from PLDVs.
• New h eavy -freight trucks are 30 % more efficient by 2040 than in the STEPS.
• Heavy -duty diesel vehicles: limit emissions to 3.5 g/km NO X and 0.03 g/km PM 2.5.
• Aviatio n: fuel intensity reduced by around 3 % per year; scale up of biofuels driven by long -term CO 2 emissions target (50% below 2005 levels in 2050).
• International shipping: annual GHG emissions trajectory consistent with 50% below 2008 levels in 2050, in line with IMO GHG emissions reduction strategy.
United States STEPS • The Safer Affordable Fuel Efficient Vehicles Final Rule for Model Years 2021 -2026.
• Electric truck penetration in the U nited States is driven by Advance Clean Trucks policy in California, which requires manufacturers to sell zero emissions trucks by 2025, reaching 55% of Class 2b – 3 truck sales, 75% of Class 4 – 8 straight truck sales and 40% of truck tractor sales.
European Union STEPS • EU recovery plan: p urchasing facility for clean vehicles, EV recharging infrastructure.
• Regulation setting CO 2 emission performance standards for new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles (vans) after 2020 (EU 2019/631) .
• Regulation reducing CO 2 Emissions from heavy -duty vehicles (EU 2019/1242).
• Italy: Subsid ies for low -emission s vehicles.
• Spain: Mobility stimulus – promoting EV sales, scrappage program mes, charging infrastructure, transport logistics program mes and hydrogen research .
• Germany: Recovery Plan – vehicle tax, R&D for vehicle manufacture rs and supply industry, charging station infrastructure, bus and truck fleet moderni sation.
• France: Vehicle scrappage scheme and conversion premium.
• Ireland: 10% biofuel blending mandate fr om 2019.
SDS • Partial implementation of announced targets for all new passenger vehicles being zero emission s vehicles by 2030.
• Electro mobility trends partially aligned with the net- zero target of the E uropean Union by 2050 .
Other Europe STEPS • United Kingdom : In 2035, partial implementation of ban on new gasoline - and diesel -powered car s and vans.
• United Kingdom : Partial inclusion of aviation net -zero emissions target .
SDS • United Kingdom: Full implementation of aviation net- zero emissions target by 2050 .
Australia and New Zealand STEPS • New Zealand: Clean Car Standard and Clean Car Discount.
Annex B | Design of the sc enarios 427 B Table B.
7 ⊳ Transport sector policies and measures as modelled by scenario in selected regions (continued) Scenario Assumptions Korea STEPS • Partial implementation of one -third of new passenger car sales targets in 2030 are EVs or FCVs .
China STEPS • New Energy Vehicle (NEV) Industry Development Plan (2021 -2035) setting out 25% of new car sales will be NEVs by 2025.
• Financial Subsidy Policy for the Promotion and Application of New Energy Vehicles.
• Cash -for-clunker schemes at provincial level.
India STEPS • Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and EV (FAME) II programme .
• New EV policies in New Delhi and Tamil Nadu .
SDS • Partial implementation of 20% bioethanol blending target for gasoline and 5% biodiesel in 2030 .
Southeast Asia STEPS • Indonesia: Introduction of the B30 program me to increase biodiesel blends to 30% in gasoil.
Notes: g CO 2/km = grammes of carbon dioxide per kilometre; NO X = nitrogen oxides; g/km = grammes per kilometre; PM 2.5 = fine particulate matter; IMO = International Maritime Organization; PLDVs = passenger light -duty vehicles; EVs = electric vehicles; FCVs: fuel cell vehicles; GHG = greenhouse gases .
428 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Table B.
8 ⊳ Industry sector policies and measures as modelled by scenario in selected regions Scenario Assumptions All regions SDS • Policies to support increasing deployment of CCUS and hydrogen in various industry and fuel transformation sub -sectors.
• Policies to support circular economies through increased recycling of aluminium, steel, paper and plastics , and material efficiency strategies.
• Enhanced minimum energy performance standards by 2025, in particular for electric motors; incentive s for the introduction of variable speed drives in variable load systems and implementation of system -wide measures.
• Mandatory energy management systems or energy audits.
United States STEPS • Increased R&D funding and extended tax credits for CCUS technologies.
• Update to Superior Energy Performance certification that supports the introduction of energy management systems.
European Union STEPS • EU Circular Economy Action Plan for sustainable products, services and business models.
• EU Carbon Pricing with an increased minimum carbon price in accordance with the 2030 Climate and Energy Framework.
• Industrial Emissions Directive, including new standards for Large Combustion Plants from the review o f the Best Available Techniques Reference Document.
• Netherlands: Industry carbon tax for major emissions sources in the sector to complement the EU E missions Trading System .
SDS • Germany: Hydrogen Strategy as part of the stimulus programme, with 5 GW of electrolyser capacity by 2030.
• France: Hydrogen Strategic Plan and 6.5 GW of capacity by 2030 .
Other Europe STEPS • United Kingdom : Climate Change Agreement on industrial energy efficiency standards and incentives .
• Turkey: Energy intensity plan on industrial energy efficiency standards and incentives.
Australia and New Zealand SDS • Australia: National Hydrogen Strategy .
China STEPS • Roll back of energy intensity targets for 2020 in response to pandemic.
• "Made in China 2025" targets for industrial energy intensity.
India STEPS • Bureau of Energy Efficiency Plans adopts ISO standards in energy -intensive industries.
• Further implementation of the National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency recommendations including a tightening of the Perform, Achieve, Trade mechanism and continuation beyond 2020 (cycles 4 and 5).
• Further implementation of the New Industrial Policy leading to a boost in domestic industrial production.
"Make in India " policy promotes the manufacturing sector.
Southeast Asia STEPS • Viet Nam: Minimum energy performance standards for electric motors.
Central and South America STEPS • Brazil: Third cycle of the Strategic Alliance Program for Energy Efficiency for industrial energy efficiency standards and incentives.
BNDES / PROESCO energy efficiency program mes.
Notes: CCUS = carbon capture, utilisation and storage; ISO = International Organization for Standardization; GW = gigawatts.
Annex C | Definitions 429 Annex C Definitions This annex provides general information on terminology used throughout the WEO -2020 including: units and general conversion factors; definitions of fuels, processes and sectors; regional and country groupings; and abbreviations and acronyms.
Units Area km2 square kilometre Coal Mtce million tonnes of coal equivalent (equals 0.7 Mtoe) Emissions ppm parts per million (by volume) Gt CO 2-eq gigatonnes of carbon -dioxide equivalent (using 100-year global warming potentials for different greenhouse gases) kg CO 2-eq kilogrammes of carbon -dioxide equivalent g CO 2/km grammes of carbon dioxide per kilometre g CO 2/kWh grammes of carbon dioxide per kilowatt -hour Energy boe barrel of oil equivalent toe tonne of oil equivalent ktoe thousand tonnes of oil equivalent Mtoe million tonnes of oil equivalent MBtu million British thermal units kWh kilowatt -hour MWh megawatt -hour GWh gigawatt -hour TWh terawatt -hour Gas bcm billion cubic metres tcm trillion cubic metres Mass kg kilogramme (1 000 kg = 1 tonne) kt kilotonnes (1 tonne x 103) Mt million tonnes (1 tonne x 106) Gt gigatonnes (1 tonne x 109) Monetary $ million 1 US dollar x 106 $ billion 1 US dollar x 109 $ trillion 1 US dollar x 1012 Oil b/d barrels per day kb/d thousand barrels per day mb/d million barrels per day mboe/d million barrels of oil equivalent per day IEA.
430 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Power W watt (1 joule per second) kW kilowatt (1 watt x 103) MW megawatt (1 watt x 106) GW gigawatt (1 watt x 109) TW terawatt (1 watt x 1012) General conversion factors for energy Convert to: TJ Gcal Mtoe MBtu GWh From: multiply by: TJ 1 238.8 2.388 x 10-5 947.8 0.2778 Gcal 4.1868 x 10-3 1 10-7 3.968 1.163 x 10-3 Mtoe 4.1868 x 104 107 1 3.968 x 107 11 630 MBtu 1.0551 x 10-3 0.252 2.52 x 10-8 1 2.931 x 10-4 GWh 3.6 860 8.6 x 10-5 3 412 1 Note: There is no generally accepted definition of boe; typically the conversion factors used vary from 7.15 to 7.
Currency conversions Exchange rates (201 9 annual average) 1 US Dollar equals: British Pound 0.78 Chinese Yuan Renminbi 6.91 Euro 0.89 Indian Rupee 70.42 Indonesian Rupiah 14 147.67 Japanese Yen 109.01 Russian Ruble 64.74 South African Rand 14.45 Source: OECD National Accounts Statistics: purchasing power parities and exchange rates dataset, July 2020 .
Definitions Advanced biofuels: Sustainable fuels produced from non -food crop feedstocks, which are capable of delivering significant lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions savings compared with fossil fuel alternatives, and which do not directly compete with food and feed crops for agricultural land or cause adverse sustainability impacts.
This definition differs from the one used for "advanced biofuels" in the US legislation, which is based on a minimum 50% lifecycle greenhouse gas reduction and which, therefore, includes sugar cane ethanol.
Agriculture: Includes all energy used on farms, in forestry and for fishing.
Annex C | Definitions 431 C Aviation: This transport mode includes both domestic and international flights and their use of aviation fuels.
Domestic aviation covers flights that depart and land in the same country; flights for military purposes are also included.
International aviation includes flight s that land in a country other than the departure location.
Back -up generation capacity: Households and businesses connected to the main power grid may also have some form of "back -up" power generation capacity that can, in the event of disruption, provide electricity.
Back -up generators are typically fuelled with diesel or gasoline and capacity can be as little as a few kilowat ts.
Such capacity is distinct from mini -grid and off -grid systems that are not connected to the main power grid.
Biodiesel: Diesel -equivalent, processed fuel made from the transesterification (a chemical process that converts triglycerides in oils) of vege table oils and animal fats.
Bioenergy: Energy content in solid, liquid and gaseous products derived from biomass feedstocks and biogas.
It includes solid biomass, biofuels and biogas es.
Biofuels: Liquid fuels derived from biomass or waste feedstocks and include ethanol and biodiesel.
They can be classified as conventional and advanced biofuels according to the technologies used to produce them and their respective maturity.
Unless otherwise stated, biofuels are expressed in energy -equivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel.
Biogas: A mixture of methane, CO₂ and small quantities of other gases produced by anaerobic digestion of organic matter in an oxygen- free environment.
Biogas es: Includes both biogas and biomethane.
Biomethane : Biomethane is a near -pure source of methane produced either by "upgrading" biogas (a process that removes any CO 2 and other contaminants present in the biogas) or through the gasification of solid biomass followed by methanation.
I t is also known as renewable natural gas.
Buildings: The buildings sector includes energy used in residential, commercial and institutional buildings and non-specified other.
Building energy use includes space heating and cooling, water heating, lighting, appliances and cooking equipment.
Bunkers : Includes both international marine bunkers and international aviation bunkers.
Capacity credit: Proportion of the capacity that can be reliably expected to generate electricity during times of peak demand in the grid to which it is connected.
Clean cooking facilities: Cooking facilities that are considered safer, more efficient and more environmentally sustainable than the traditional facilities that make use of solid biomass (such as a three -stone fire).
This refers primarily to improved solid biomass cookstoves, biogas systems, liquefied petroleum gas stoves, ethanol and solar stoves.
Coal: Includes both primary coal (including lignite, coking and steam coal) and derived fuels (including patent fuel, brown- coal briquettes, coke -oven coke, gas coke, gas -works gas, coke -oven gas, blast furnace gas and oxygen steel furnace gas).
432 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Coalbed methane (CBM) : Category of unconventional natural gas, which refers to methane found in coal seams.
Coal- to-gas (CTG) : Process in which mined coal is first turned into syngas (a mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide) and then into "synthetic" methane.
Coal- to-liquids (CTL) : Transformation of coal into liquid hydrocarbons.
It can be achieved through either coal gasification into syngas (a mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide), combined using the Fischer- Tropsch or methanol -to-gasoline synthesis process to produce liquid fuels, or through the less developed direct -coal liquefaction technologies in which coal is directly reacted with hydrogen.
Coking coal: Type of coal that can be used for steel making (as a chemical reductant and source heat), where it produces coke capable of supporting a blast furnace charge.
Coal of this quality is also commonly known as metallurgical coal.
Conventional biofuels: Fuels produced from food crop feedstocks.
These biofuels are commonly referred to as first generation and include sugar cane ethanol, starch -based ethanol, fatty acid methyl esther (FAME) and straight vegetable oil (SVO).
Decomposition analysis: Statistical a pproach that decomposes an aggregate indicator to quantify the relative contribution of a set of pre -defined factors leading to a change in the aggregate indicator.
The World Energy Outlook uses an additive index decomposition of the type Logarithmic Mean Divisia Index (LMDI).
Demand -side integration (DSI): Consists of two types of measures: actions that influence load shape such as energy efficiency and electrification; and actions that manage load such as demand -side response.
Demand -side response (DSR): Describes actions which can influence the load profile such as shifting the load curve in time without affecting the total electricity demand, or load shedding such as interrupting demand for short duration or adjusting the intensity of demand for a certai n amount of time.
Dispatchable : Dispatchable generation refers to technologies whose power output can be readily controlled - increased to maximum rated capacity or decreased to zero - in order to match supply with demand.
Electricity demand: Defined as total gross electricity generation less own use generation, plus net trade (imports less exports), less transmissions and distribution losses.
Electricity generation: Defined as the total amount of electricity generated by power only or combined heat and power plants including generation required for own use.
This is also referred to as gross generation.
Energy sector CO 2 emissions : Carbon dioxide emissions from fuel combustion (excluding non-renewable waste).
Note that this does not include fugitive em issions from fuels, CO 2 from transport, storage emissions or industrial process emissions.
Annex C | Definitions 433 C Energy sector GHG emissions : CO 2 emissions from fuel combustion plus fugitive and vented methane , and nitrous dioxide ( N2O) emissions from the energy and industry se ctors.
Energy services: See useful energy.
Ethanol: Refers to bio -ethanol only.
Ethanol is produced from fermenting any biomass high in carbohydrates.
Today, ethanol is made from starches and sugars, but second -generation technologies will allow it to be made from cellulose and hemicellulose, the fibrous material that makes up the bulk of most plant matter.
Gas-to-liquids (GTL) : Process featuring reaction of methane with oxygen or steam to produce syngas (a mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide) followed by synthesis of liquid products (such as diesel and naphtha) from the syngas using Fischer -Tropsch catalytic synthesis.
The process is similar to those used in coal- to-liquids.
Heat (end -use) : Can be obtained from the combustion of fossil or renewable fuels, direct geothermal or solar heat systems, exothermic chemical processes and electricity (through resistance heating or heat pumps which can extract it from ambient air and liquids).
This category refers to the wide range of end -uses, including space and water heating, and cooking in buildings, desalination and process applications in industry.
It does not include cooling applications.
Heat (supply) : Obtained from the combustion of fuels, nuclear reactors, geothermal resources and the capture of sunlight.
It may be used for heating or cooling, or converted into mechanical energy for transport or electricity generation.
Commercial heat sold is reported under total final consumption with the fuel inputs allocated under power generation.
Hydrogen : Hydrogen is an energy carrier that can be burnt or used in fuel cells to generate electricity and heat.
Main production pathways are natural gas reforming and electrolysis of water.
It is called low -carbo n if hydrogen is produced via CCUS -equipped reformers or electrolysers running on low -carbon electricity.
Hydropower: The energy content of the electricity produced in hydropower plants, assuming 100% efficiency.
It excludes output from pumped storage and marine (tide and wave) plants.
Industry: The sector includes fuel used within the manufacturing and construction industries.
Key industry branches include iron and steel, chemical and petrochemical, cement, and pulp and paper.
Use by industries for the transformation of energy into another form or for the production of fuels is excluded and reported separately under other energy sector.
Consumption of fuels for the transport of goods is reported as part of the transport sector, while consumption by off -road vehicles is reported under industry.
International aviation bunkers: Includes the deliveries of aviation fuels to aircraft for international aviation.
Fuels used by airlines for their road vehicles are excluded.
The domestic/international split is determined on the basis of departure and landing locations and not by the nationality of the airline.
For many countries this incorrectly excludes fuels used by domestically owned carriers for their international departures.
434 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes International marine bunkers: Covers those quantities delivered to ships of all flags that are engaged in international navigation.
The international navigation may take place at sea, on inland lakes and waterways, and in coastal waters.
Consumption by ships engaged in domestic naviga tion is excluded.
The domestic/international split is determined on the basis of port of departure and port of arrival, and not by the flag or nationality of the ship.
Consumption by fishing vessels and by military forces is also excluded and included in residential, services and agriculture.
Investment: All investment data and projections reflect spending across the lifecycle of a project, i.e.
the capital spent is assigned to the year when it is incurred.
Investments for oil, gas and coal include production, transformation and transportation; those for the power sector include refurbishments, uprates, new builds and replacements for all fuels and technologies for on -grid, mini -grid and off -grid generation, as well as investment in transmission and distribution, and battery storage.
Investment data are presented in real terms in year -2019 US dollars unless otherwise stated.
Lignite: Type of coal that is used in the power sector mostly in regions near lignite mines due to its low energy content and typically high moisture levels, which generally makes long -distance transport uneconomic.
Data on lignite in the W orld Energy Outlook includes peat, a solid formed from the partial decomposition of dead vegetation under conditions of high humidity and limited air a ccess.
Liquids: Refers to the combined use of oil and biofuels (expressed in energy -equivalent volumes of gasoline and diesel) .
Lower heating value: Heat liberated by the complete combustion of a unit of fuel when the water produced is assumed to remain as a vapour and the heat is not recovered.
Middle distillates: Include jet fuel, diesel and heating oil.
Mini- grids: Small grid systems linking a number of households or other consumers.
Modern energy access: Includes household access to a minimum level of electricity; household access to safer and more sustainable cooking and heating fuels , and stoves; access that enables productive economic activity; and access for public services.
Modern renewables: Includes all uses of renewable energy with the exceptio n of traditional use of solid biomass.
Modern use of solid biomass: Refers to the use of solid biomass in improved cookstoves and modern technologies using processed biomass such as pellets.
Natural g as: Comprises gases occurring in deposits, whether liqu efied or gaseous, consisting mainly of methane.
It includes both "non -associated" gas originating from fields producing hydrocarbons only in gaseous form, and "associated" gas produced in association with crude oil as well as methane recovered from coal mi nes (colliery gas).
Natural gas liquids (NGLs), manufactured gas (produced from municipal or industrial waste, or sewage) and quantities vented or flared are not included.
Gas data in cubic metres are IEA.
Annex C | Definitions 435 C expressed on a "gross" calorific value basis and are measured at 15 °C and at 760 mm Hg ("Standard Conditions").
Gas data expressed in tonnes of oil equivalent, mainly for comparison reasons with other fuels, are on a "net" calorific basis.
The difference between the net and the gross calorific value is the la tent heat of vaporisation of the water vapour produced during combustion of the fuel (for gas the net calorific value is 10% lower than the gross calorific value).
Natural gas liquids (NGLs): Liquid or liquefied hydrocarbons produced in the manufacture, purification and stabilisation of natural gas.
These are those portions of natural gas which are recovered as liquids in separators, field facilities or gas processing plants.
NGLs include but are not limited to ethane (when it is removed from the natural gas stream), propane, butane, pentane, natural gasoline and condensates.
Non -energy use: Fuels used for chemical feedstocks and non -energy products.
Examples of non-energy products include lubricants, paraffin waxes, asphalt, bitumen, coal tars and oils as timber preservatives.
Nuclear: Refers to the primary energy equivalent of the electricity produced by a nuclear plant, assuming an average conversion efficiency of 33%.
Off-grid systems: Stand -alone systems for individual households or groups of consumer s. Offshore wind : Refers to electricity produced by wind turbines that are installed in open water, usually in the ocean.
Oil: Oil production includes both conventional and unconventional oil.
Petroleum products include refinery gas, ethane, liquid petrole um gas, aviation gasoline, motor gasoline, jet fuels, kerosene, gas/diesel oil, heavy fuel oil, naphtha, white spirit, lubricants, bitumen, paraffin, waxes and petroleum coke.
Other energy sector: Covers the use of energy by transformation industries and the energy losses in converting primary energy into a form that can be used in the final consuming sectors.
It includes losses by gas works, petroleum refineries, blast furnaces, coke ovens, coal an d gas transformation and liquefaction.
It also includes energy own use in coal mines, in oil and gas extraction and in electricity and heat production.
Transfers and statistical differences are also included in this category.
Peri-urban: Peri-urban areas are zones of transition from rural to urban which often form the urban -rural interface and may evolve into being fully urban.
Power generation: Refers to fuel use in electricity plants, heat plants and combined heat and power (CHP) plants.
Both main activity producer plants and small plants that produce fuel for their own use (auto -producers) are included.
Productive uses: Energy used towards an economic purpose: agriculture, industry, services and non-energy use.
Some energy demand from the transport sector (e.g.
freight) could also be considered as productive, but is treated separately.
436 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Renewables: Includes bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, solar photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar power (CSP), wind and marine (tide and wave) energy for electricity and heat generation.
Residential: Energy used by households including space heating and cooling, water heating, lighting, appliances, electronic devices and cooking equipment.
Self-sufficiency: Corresponds to indigenous production divided by total primary ene rgy demand.
Services: Energy used in commercial (e.g.
hotels, offices, catering, shops) and institutional buildings (e.g.
Services energy use includes space heating and cooling, water heating, lighting, equipment, appliances and cooking equipment.
Shale gas: Natural gas contained within a commonly occurring rock classified as shale.
Shale formations are characterised by low permeability, with more limited ability of gas to flow through the rock than is the case with a conventional reservoir.
Shale gas is generally produced using hydraulic fracturing.
Shipping/ navigation: This transport sub -sector includes both domestic and international navigation and their use of marine fuels.
Domestic navigation covers the transport of goods or persons on inland waterways and for national sea voyages (starts and ends in the same country without any intermediate foreign port).
International navigation includes quantities of fuels delivered to merchant ships (including passenger ships) of any nationality for consumpti on during international voyages transporting goods or passengers.
Solid biomass: Includes charcoal, fuelwood, dung, agricultural residues, wood waste and other solid wastes.
Steam coal: Type of coal that is mainly used for heat production or steam -raisin g in power plants and, to a lesser extent, in industry.
Typically, steam coal is not of sufficient quality for steel making.
Coal of this quality is also commonly known as thermal coal.
Tight oil: Oil produced from shales or other very low permeability for mations, using hydraulic fracturing.
This is also sometimes referred to as light tight oil.
Tight oil includes tight crude oil and condensate production except for the United States, which includes tight crude oil only (US tight condensate volumes are included in natural gas liquids).
Total final consumption (TFC) : Is the sum of consumption by the various end-use sectors.
TFC is broken down into energy demand in the following sectors: industry (including manufacturing and mining), transport, buildings (including residential and services) and other (including agriculture and non -energy use).
It excludes international marine and aviation bunkers, except at world level where it is included in the transport sector.
Total final energy consumption (TFEC) : Is a variable defined primarily for tracking progress towards target 7.2 of the Sustainable Development Goals.
It incorporates total final consumption (TFC) by end -use sectors but excludes non -energy use.
It excludes international marine and aviation bunkers, except at world level.
Annex C | Definitions 437 C the context of calculating the renewable energy share in total final energy consumption (Indicator 7.2.1 of the Sustainable Development Goals), where TFEC is the denominator.
Total primary energy demand (TPED) : Represents domestic demand only and is broken down into power generation, other energy sector and total final consumption.
Traditional use of solid biomass: Refers to the use of solid biomass with basic technologies, such as a three -stone fire, often with no or poorly operating chimneys.
Transport: Fuels and electricity used in the transport of goods or persons within the national territory irrespective of the economic sector within which the activity occurs.
This includes fuel and electricity delivered to vehicles using public roads or for use in rail vehicles; fuel delivered to vessels for domestic navigation; fuel delivered to aircraft for domestic aviation; and energy consumed in the delivery of fuels through pipelines.
Fuel delivered to international marine and aviation bunkers is presented only at the world level and is excluded from the transport sector at a domestic level.
Useful energy: Refers to the energy that is available to end -users to satisfy their needs.
This is also referred to as ener gy services demand.
As result of transformation losses at the point of use, the amount of useful energy is lower than the corresponding final energy demand for most technologies.
Equipment using electricity often has higher conversion efficiency than equipment using other fuels, meaning that for a unit of energy consumed electricity can provide more energy services.
Variable renewable energy (VRE): Refers to technologies whose maximum output at any time depends on the availability of fluctuating renewable energy resources.
VRE includes a broad array of technologies such as wind power, solar PV, run -of-river hydro, concentrating solar power (where no thermal storage is included) and marine (tidal and wave).
Regional and country groupings Advanced economies: OECD regional grouping and Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus1,2, Malta and Romania.
Africa: North Africa and sub- Saharan Africa regional groupings.
Asia Pacific: Southeast Asia regional grouping and Australia, Bangladesh, China, India, Japan, Korea, Democratic Peo ple's Republic of Korea, Mongolia, Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Chinese Taipei, and other Asia Pacific countries and territories.3 Caspian: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
Central and South America: Argentina, Plurinational State of Bolivia (Bolivia) , Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Curaçao, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Venezuela), and other Central and South American countries and territories.4 IEA.
438 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Figure C.1 ⊳ World Energy Outlook main country groupings Note: This map is without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
China: Includes the (People's Republic of ) China and Hong Kong , China .
Developing Asia: Asia Pacific regional grouping excluding Australia, Japan, Korea and New Zealand.
Emerging market and developing economies: All other countries not included in the advanced economies regional grouping.
Eurasia: Caspian regional grouping and the Russian Federation (Russia) .
Europe: European Union regional grouping and Albania, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina , North Macedonia, Gibraltar, Iceland, Israel5, Kosovo, Montenegro, Norway, Serbi a, Switzerland, Republic of Moldova, Turkey , Ukraine and United Kingdom .
European Union: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus1,2, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain and Sweden .
IEA (International Energy Agency) : OECD regional grouping excluding Chile, Iceland, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania and Slovenia.
Latin America: Central and South America regional grouping and Mexico.
Middle East: Bahrain, Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran) , Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic (Syria), United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
Non -OECD: All other countries not included in the OECD regional grouping.
Annex C | Definitions 439 C Non -OPEC: All other countries not included in the O PEC regional grouping.
North Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia.
North America: Canada, Mexico and United States.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development) : Australia, Austria, Belgium, C anada, Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania , Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Po rtugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom and United States .
Colombia became a member of the OECD in April 2020, and its membership is not yet reflected in WEO projections for the OECD.
OPEC (Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) : Algeria, Angola, Republic of the Congo (Congo) , Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, the Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran), Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Venezuela ), based on membership status as of Octo ber 2020.
Southeast Asia: Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR), Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
These countries are all members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Sub-Saharan Africa: Angola, Benin, Botswana, Cameroon, Republic of the Congo (Congo), Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo , Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Kenya, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, South Sudan, Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania (Tanzania) , Togo, Zambia, Zimbabwe and other African countries and territories.6 Country notes 1 Note by Turkey: The information in this document with reference to "Cyprus" relates to the southern part of the island.
There is no single authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the island.
Turkey recognises the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC).
Until a lasting and equitable solution is found within the context of the United Nations, Turkey shall preserve its position concerning the "Cyprus issue".
2 Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union: The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Turkey.
The information in this document relates to the area under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.
3 Individual data are not available and are estimated in aggregate for: Afghanistan, Bhutan, Cook Islands, F iji, French Polynesia, Kiribati, Maca u (China), Maldives, New Caledonia, Palau, Papua New Guinea , Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor -Leste and Tonga and Vanuatu.
4 Individual data are not available and are estimated in aggregate for: Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, Bonaire, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Falkland Islands (Malvinas) , French Gu iana, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Guyana, Martinique, Montserrat, Saba, Saint Eustatius, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia , Saint Pierre and Miquelon, S aint Vincent and Grenadines, Saint Maarten, Turks and Caicos Islands.
5 The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities.
The use of such data by the OECD and/or the IEA is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law.
440 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes 6 Individual data are not available and are estimated in aggregate for: Burkina Faso, Burundi, Ca bo Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Kingdom of Eswatini, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea -Bissau, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Réunion , Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Uganda.
Abbreviations and Acronyms APEC Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations BECCS bioenergy equipped with CCUS BEV battery electric vehicles CAAGR compound average annual growth rate CAFE corporate average fuel-economy standards (United States) CBM coalbed methane CCGT combined -cycle gas turbine CCUS carbon capture, utilisation and storage CEM Clean Energy Ministerial CFL compact fluorescent lamp CH 4 methane CHP combined heat and power; the term co-generation is sometimes used CNG compressed natural gas CO carbon monoxide CO 2 carbon dioxide CO 2-eq carbon -dioxide equivalent COP Conference of Parties (UNFCCC) CSP concentrating solar power CTG coal-to-gas CTL coal-to-liquids DER distributed energy resources DRS Delayed Recovery Scenario DSI demand -side integration DSO distribution system operator DSR demand -side response EHOB extra -heavy oil and bitumen EOR enhanced oil recovery EPA Environmental Protection Agency (United States) ESG environmental, social and governance EU European Union EU ETS European Union Emissions Trading System EV electric vehicle FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FCEV fuel cell electric vehicle FDI foreign direct investment FiT feed -in tariff FOB free on board IEA.
Annex C | Definitions 441 C GDP gross domestic product GHG greenhouse gases GTL gas-to-liquids HFO heavy fuel oil IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency ICE internal combustion engine ICT information and communication technologies IEA International Energy Agency IGCC integrated gasification combined -cycle IIASA International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis IMF International Monetary Fund IMO International Maritime Organization IOC international oil company IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change LCOE levelised cost of electricity LCV light -commercial vehicle LED light -emitting diode LNG liquefied natural gas LPG liquefied petroleum gas LULUCF land use, land -use change and forestry MEPS minimum energy performance standards MER market exchange rate NDCs Nationally Determined Contributions NEA Nuclear Energy Agency (an agency within the OECD) NGLs natural gas liquids NGV natural gas vehicle NOC national oil company NPV net present value NO X nitrogen oxides N2O nitrous dioxide NZE2050 Net Zero Emissions by 2050 case OECD Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development OPEC Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries PHEV plug -in hybrid electric vehicles PLDV passenger light -duty vehicle PM particulate matter PM 2.5 fine particulate matter PPA power purchase agreement PPP purchasing power parity PV photovoltaic s R&D research and development RD&D research, development and demonstration RRR remaining recoverable resource SDG Sustainable Development Goals (United Nations) IEA.
442 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes SDS Sustainable Development Scenario SME small and medium enterprises SMR steam methane reformation SO 2 sulphur dioxide STEPS Stated Policies Scenario SWH solar water or solar water heaters T&D transmission and distribution TES thermal energy storage TFC total final consumption TFEC total final energy consumption TPED total primary energy demand TSO transmission system operator UAE United Arab Emirates UN United Nations UNDP United Nations Development Program me UNEP United Nations Environment Program me UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change URR ultimately recoverable resources US United States USGS United States Geological Survey VALCOE value -adjusted levelised cost of electricity VRE variable renewable energy WACC weighted average cost of capital WEM World Energy Model WEO World Energy Outlook WHO World Health Organization IEA.
Annex D | References 443 Annex D References Part A: Overview and Introduction Chapter 1: Overview and key findings GOGLA (Global Off -Grid Lighting Association) (2020), Global Off- Grid Solar Market Report January -June 2020, GOGLA in partnership with IFC Lighting Global and Efficiency for Access Coalition, -off-grid-solar -market -report.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris, -recovery .
– (2020b), Global Energy Review 2020: The impacts of the Covid- 19 crisis on global energy demand and CO 2 emissions , IEA, Paris, obal -energy -review2020.
– (2020c), World Energy Investment 2020, IEA, Paris.
-investment -2020 – (2020d), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020 , IEA, Paris, energy -technology -perspectives -2020.
– (2020e), The Oil and Gas Industry in Energy Transitions , IEA, Paris.
reports/the -oil-and-gas-industry -in-energy -transitions .
– (2019), World Energy Outlook -2019 , IEA, Paris, -energyoutlook -2019.
Chapter 2: An energy world in lockdown Argus Global LNG (2020), LNG markets, projects, and infrastructure, Volumes XVI 2 and 10 , www.argusmedia.com.
Bundesnetzagentur|SMARD.de (2020), Marketdata (database), downloadcenter/download -market -data, accessed 10 September 2020.
(2020), "Global, regional, and national estimates of the population at increased risk of se vere COVID -19 due to underlying health conditions in 2020: a modelling study", The Lancet , Vol.
E1003 -E1017, 1 August 2020, 10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30264-3.
ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control) (2020), Situation Update Worldwide, (database) official data collected by Our World in Data, -cases#acknowledgements, accessed 21 September 2020.
ELEXON (Balancing and Settlement Code Company) (2020), Electricity data summary (database), accessed 10 September 2020.
ENTSO- E (2020), Transparency Platform (database), accessed 10 September 2020.
444 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Fitch Ratings (2020), Improved Onshore Liquidity Helps Chinese Corporates Refinance, (commentary) 7 May 2020, Fitch Ratings, corporate -finance/improved -onshore -liquidity -helps -chinese -corporates -refinance -07-052020.
(2020), Oxford Covid -19 Government Response Tra cker (website), Blavatnik School of Government, Oxford University, -government -response -tracker, accessed 18 September 2020.
ICIS LNG Edge (2020), (database), accessed 1 October 2020.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020: Special Report on Clean Energy Innovation, IEA, Paris, -energyinnovation.
– (2020b), Global Energy Review 2020 , IEA, Paris, ht tps://www.iea.org/reports/globalenergy -review -2020.
– (2020c), World Energy Investment 2020 , IEA, Paris, -investment -2020.
– (2020d), Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris, -recovery.
IHS Energy (2020), Coal McCloskey Price and Statistical Data, (database), accessed 9 September 2020.
IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2020a), June 2020: A Crisis Like No Other , An Uncertain Recovery , IMF, Washington DC.
– (2020b), World Economic Outlook Database , April 2020 Edition, Washington DC.
– (2020c), World Economic Outlook Database , January 2020 update, IMF, Washington, DC.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2018), Global warming of 1.5°C.
An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre -industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [V. Masson -Delmotte, P. Zhai, H. O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R.
Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma -Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.
B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, T. Waterfield (eds.
)], World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Kose M. et al.
(2020), "Caught by a cresting debt wave", Finance and Development , Vol 57, nN 2, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, pubs/ft/fandd/2020/06/COVID19 -and-debt -in-developing -economies -kose.htm.
Maddison Project Database, Bolt, J. et al.
(2018), "Rebasing 'Maddison': New income comparisons and the shape of long run economic develo pment", GGDC Research Memorandum, Vol.
GD -174, Groningen Growth and Development Center, Groningen, Netherlands, , accessed 18 September 2020).
Annex D | References 445 D Oxford Economics (2020), Oxford Economics Global Economic Model , (database), -economic -model , August 2020 update, Oxford.
POSOCO (Power System Operation Corporation Limited) (2020), Daily Power Supply Position Report (web page), -reports/daily -reports -2020-21/, accessed 18 September 2020.
REE (Red Eléctrica de España) (2020), Total Load – Day Ahead / Actual (data accessed via the ENTSO- E Transparency Platform), d-domain/ r2/totalLoadR2/show, accessed 18 September 2020.
(2020), Daily new confirmed COVID -19 cases, (webpage), OurWorldInData.org, #our -world -in-data -relies -ondata -from -the-european- cdc, accessed 21 September 2020.
RTE (Réseau de Transport d'Électricité) (2020), Electricity demand (web page ), -france.com/en/eco2mix/, accessed 18 September 2020.
TERNA (transmission system operator in Italy) (2020), Transparency report: The dashboard, (webpage), -system/transparen cy-report , accessed 18 September 2020).
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) (2020), Covid -19 educational disruption and response, (webpage), educationresponse , accessed 18 September 2020.
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs) (2019), 2019 Revision of World Population Prospects , accessed 18 September 2020.
US EIA (US Energy Information Administration) (2020), Europe Brent spot price, (webpage), , accessed 16 September 2020.
World Bank (2019), Global Economic Prospects , January 2019: Dar kening Skies, Washington, DC, doi: 10.1596/978 -1-4648-1343-6.
Part B: Scenarios Chapter 3: Building on a sustainable recovery Agência Brasil (2019), Preço do gás e desemprego elevam uso da lenha para cozinhar no Brasil (Gas prices and unemployment increase the use of firewood for cooking in Brazil ), -06/preco -do-gas-e-desempregoelevam -uso-da-lenha -para -cozinhar -no-brasil Bloomberg (2020), Bloomberg Terminal, accessed 10 September 2020.
BNEF (Bloomberg New Energy Finance) (2020), Sustainable finance , (database), accessed 10 September 2020.
Climate Bonds Initiative (2020), Markets Monthly #8, files/Markets -Monthly_August_02092020_final.pdf .
446 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Conticini, E., Frediani , B., and Caro , D. (2020), "Can atmospheric pollution be considered a co-factor in extremely high level of SARS -CoV-2 lethality in Northern Italy?"
261, CREA (Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air ) (2020a), Air pollution returns to European capitals: Paris faces largest rebound, (b riefing), pollution -returns -to-european -capitals/ .
– (2020b), The rebound in air p ollution in China, wp-content/uploads/2020/05/China -air-pollution -rebound -final.pdf .
– (2018), Quantifying the economic costs of air pollution from fossil fuels, (briefing), -content/uploads/2020/02/Cost -of-fossil -fuelsbriefing.pdf .
(2020), Risk premiums, ~adamodar/.
ECF (European Cyclists' Foundation) (2020), COVID -19 Cycling Measures Tracker, EnDev (2020), COVID -19 Energy Access I ndustry Barometer, 2/2a/EnDev_Energy_Access_Industry_Barometer_Summary_FINAL.pdf .
GOGLA (Global Off -Grid Lighting Association ) (2020), Global Off- Grid Solar Market Report January -June 2020 , GOGLA in partnership with IFC Lighting Global and Efficiency for Access Coalition, -off-grid-solar -market -report.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), Sustai nable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report, IEA, Paris, -recovery .
– (2020b), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020, IEA, Paris, energy -technology -perspe ctives -2020.
– (2020c), Methane Tracker , IEA, Paris, -tracker2020.
– (2020d), Energy Technology Perspectives: Special Report on CCUS in clean energy transitions , IEA, Paris , -in-clean -energy -transitions .
– (2019a), Africa Energy Outlook: World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris, -energy -outlook -2019.
– (2019b), World Energy Out look -2019 , IEA, Paris, -outlook -2019.
– (2019c), Material Efficiency in Clean Energy Transitions , IEA, Paris, reports/material -efficiency -in-clean -energy -transitions.
IEA, IRENA, UNSD, World Bank, WHO ( International Energy Agency, International Renewable Energy Agency, United Nations Statistics Division, World Health Organization) (2020), Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report, World Bank, Washington DC .
IMF (Intern ational Monetary Fund) (2020), COVID-19 crisis p oses threat to financial stability (blog), -19-crisis -poses -threat -to-financial- stability/ .
Annex D | References 447 D ITDP (Institute for Transportation and Development Policy) (2020), During coronavirus, Jakarta's cycling grows as does police b acklash, -cycling -grows -as-does -police -backlash/ .
ITF (International Trans port Forum) (2020), Re -spacing our cities for r esilienc e, -oecd.org/sites/default/files/respacing -cities -resilience -covid -19.pdf.
(2020), "How much does reducing inequality matter for global poverty?
", Global Poverty Monitoring Technical Note, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Myllyvirta, L. and H. Thieriot (2020), Europe Covid Impacts, (web page), -content/uploads/2020/04/CREA -Europe -COVIDimpacts.pdf.
Power for All (20 19), Powe ring Jobs Census 2019: The energy access w orkforce, -Jobs -Census2019.pdf.
(2020), "SARS -Cov-2RNA found on particulate matter of Bergamo in Northern Italy: First e vidence", Environmental Research , Vol.
(2020), "COVID -19 Lockdown in a Kenyan informal urban s ettlement: Impacts on Household Energy and Food Security", medRxiv , 2020.05.27.20115113 .
(2020), "Diurnal and temporal changes in air pollution during COVID -19 strict lockdown over different regions of India", Environmental Pollution , Vol.
266, Sustainable Energy for All (2019), Energizing Finance: Understanding the Landscape , -finance -understanding -the-landscape2019.
Transport Environment (2020), No going back: European public opinion on air pollution in the Covid -19 era, (briefing), -goingback -european- public -opinion -air-pollution -covid -19-era.
World Air Quality Index (2020), Air Quality Open Data Platform , World Health Organiz ation (WHO) (2020), Household e nergy database, World Health Organization , Geneva , int/airpollution/data/household -energydatabase/en/.
Chapter 4: Achieving net -zero emissions by 2050 Alexander, L. P. and M.C.
Gonzalez (2015), "Assessing the impact of real- time ridesharing on urban traffic using mobile phone data ", Proc.
Australian Government (2020), Heating and cooling, (web page), -and-cooling.
448 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Cao, S. and H -Y Deng (2018), "Investigation of temperature regulation effects on indoor thermal comfort, air quality, and energy savings toward green residential buildings", Science and Technology for the Built Environment , 23744731.2018.1526016.
CCC (Committee on Climate Change, United Kingdom) (2019), Net Zero: The UK's contribution to stopping global warming, CCC, London, -Zero -The-UKs- contribution -to-stopping -global- warming.pdf.
European Commission (2018), In -depth analysis in support o f the Commission communication COM(2018) 773, com_2018_733_analysis_in_support_en_0.pdf.
European Environment Agency (2019), Do lower speed limits on motorways reduce fuel consumption and pollutant e missions?, speed -limits -fuel-consumption- and.
(2012), Behavioural Climate Change Mitigation, European Commission, -b330-47c4- beacd4d4f5dec681.0001.07/DOC_1.
GlobalABC, IEA, UNEP (Global Alliance for Buildings and Construction, International Energy Agency and the United Nations Environment Programme) (2 020), GlobalABC Roadmap for Buildings and Construction 2020 -2050 , IEA, Paris, -for-buildings -and-construction -2020-2050 .
Goel, P., L. Kulik and K. Ramamohanarao (2017), "Optimal pick up point selection for effective ride sharing", IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 3(2), 154 –168.
Highways England (2020), Air quality speed limit trials, (web page), work/air- quality/air -quality -speed -limit -trials/.
ICCT (International Council on Clean Transportation) (2019), Mobile air conditioning: The lifecycle costs and greenhouse gas benefits of switching to alternative refrigerants and improving system efficiencies, -air-conditioningcbe-20190308.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris, -recovery .
– (2020b), The Oil and Gas Industry in Energy Transitions, IEA, Paris, reports/the -oil-and-gas-industry -in-energy -transitions.
– (2020c), "Clean energy progress after the Covid -19 crisis will need reliable supplies of critical minerals", IEA, Paris, -energy -progress -after -thecovid -19-crisis -will- need -reliable -supplies -of-critical -minerals.
– (2020d), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020: Special Report on Clean Energy Innovation, IEA, Paris, /clean -energy -innovation .
– (2020e), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020: Special Report on CCUS in clean energy transitions , IEA, Paris, -in-clean -energy -transitions.
Annex D | References 449 D – (2020f), " Working from home can save energy and reduce emissions.
", (IEA Commentary), -from -home -can-saveenergy -and-reduce -emissions -but-how -much .
– (2019a), World Energy Outlook -2019 , IEA, Paris, rldenergy -outlook -2019.
– (2019b), Offshore Wind Outlook 2019: World Energy Outlook Special Report , -wind -outlook -2019.
– (2019c), Cooling on the Move: The future of air conditioning in vehicles , IEA, Paris, -on-the-move .
– (2018), Saving Oil in a Hurry , IEA, Paris, -oil-in-ahurry.
Indian Bureau of Energy Efficiency (2018), "Frequently Asked Questions on BEE recommenda tions on temperature setting of air c onditioners", (press release) 29 June 2018, IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2018), Global Warming of 1.5 °C, An IPCC Special Report on the i mpacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre -industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development and efforts to eradicate povert y, [Masson -Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.O.
Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma -Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.
), World Meteoro logical Organization, Geneva, Jalali, R. et al.
(2017), "Investigating the potential of ridesharing to reduce vehicle emissions", Urban Planning , Vol.
Jeffreys, I., F. Graves and M. Roth (2018), "Evaluation of eco-driving training for vehicle fuel use and emission reduction: A case study in Australia", Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment , Vol.
Jones, C. and D. Kammen (2011), "Quantifying carbon footprint reduction opportunities for U.S.", Environmental Science & Technology , Vol.
4088 –4095, wp-content/uploads/2015/04/JonesKammen -EST-2011- Quantifying_Carbon_Footprint.pdf .
(2020), "A near -term to net zero alternative to the social cost of carbon for setting carbon prices", Nature Climate Change, 1038/s41558-0200880-3.
Kyodo News (2019), "Japan begins 'Cool Biz' energy -saving casual wear campaign", (news report) 7 May 2019, -japanbegins -cool -biz-energy -saving -casual -wear -campaign.html.
Oak Ri dge National Laboratory (2013), Energy, Carbon Emissions and Financial Savings from Thermostat Control , IEA.
450 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Pakula, C. and R. Stamminger (2015), "Energy and water savings potential in automatic laund ry washing processes", Energy Efficiency , Vol.
205– 222, DOI 10.1007/s12053014-9288-0.
(2020), "Taking stock of national climate policies to evaluate implementation of the Paris Agreement", Nature Communications , pp.
15414-6, Shahmohammadi, S. et al.
(2018), "Quantifying drivers of variability in lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions of consumer products —a case study on laundry washing in Europe", Int J Life Cycle Assess, Vol.
Subiantoro, A., K. Ooi and U. Stimming (2014), "Energy saving measures for automotive air conditioning system in the tropics", International Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Conference, Paper 1361, https: //docs.lib.purdue.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
(2013), "Predicting light -duty vehicle fuel economy as a function of highway speed", SAE Int.
859-875, UK Government (United Kingdom Government) (2020), "End of coal power to be brought forward in drive towards net zero", (press release) 4 February 2020, government/news/end -of-coal-power -to-be-brought -forward -in-drive -towards -net-zero.
– (2019a), Mode of Travel, Statistical Data Set, Department for Transport, -data -sets/nts03 -modal -comparisons .
– (2019b), Updated Energy and Emissions Projections 2018: Projections of greenhouse gas emissions and energy demand from 2018 to 2035, Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, s/updated -energy -andemissions -projections -2018.
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) (2019), Nations renew their push to upscale action by 2020 and achieve net z ero CO 2 emissions by 2050, (press release) 11 December 2019, https:/ /unfccc.int/news/climate -ambition -alliance -nationsrenew -their -push- to-upscale -action -by-2020- and-achieve- net-zero.
United States Office for Energy Efficiency and Ren ewable Energy (2018), "In 2017 nearly 60% of all vehicle trips were less than six m iles", articles/fotw -1042- august -13-2018-2017- nearly -60-all-vehicle -trips -were -less-six-miles.
– (2017), "Comparison of vehicle efficiencies using the air conditioner versus windows down", s/articles/fact -990- august -14-2017comparison -vehicle -efficiencies -using -air-conditioner.
Verbraucherzentrale Hamburg (2018), Energiesparen im Haushalt : So können Sie einfach Energie sparen (Saving energy at home : This is how you can easily save energy) , -wohnen- energie/energiesparen -im-haushalt/sokoennen -sie-einfach -energie- sparen.
Annex D | References 451 D Wang, H. (2015), "Beijing passenger car travel survey: Implications for alternative fuel vehicle deployment", Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change , Vol.
817 -835. doi:DOI: 10.1007/s11027 -014-9609-9.
(2020), "Change this laundry habit and help cut CO 2 pollution by 400 000 cars", (news article) 27 April 2020, Which?, -thislaundry -habit -and-help -cut-co2-pollution -by-400000- cars/.
Chapter 5: Outlook for energy demand IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris, -recovery.
– (2020b), Oil Market Report - September 2020 , IEA, Paris, oil-market -report -september -2020.
– (2019a), World Energy Outlook -2019 ,IEA, Paris, -outlook -2019.
– (2019b), Africa Energy Outlook : World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris, -energy -outlook -2019.
– (2019c), Offshore Wind Outlook 2019 , IEA , Paris, -outlook -2019. WHO (World Health Organization) (2016), WHO Household energy database,World Health Organisation, -energy -database/en/, accessed 10 July 2020.
World Nuclear Association (2020), The Nuclear Fuel Report: Expanded Summary – Global Scenarios for Demand and Supply Availability 2019 -2040 , World Nuclear Association, London.
Chapter 6: Outlook for electricity BNEF (Bloomberg New Energy Finance) (2020), Electric Vehicles Outlook 2020, -vehicle -outlook/ .
CAISO (California Independent System Operator) (2020), Wind and Solar Curtailment May 31, 2020, -TimeDispatchCurtailment ReportMay31_2020.pdf.
China Daily (2020), World's first flexible DC power grid starts operation , https ://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202007/01/WS5efc061ea3108348172566e2.html, accessed 21 September 2020.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), Global Energy Review 2020 , IEA, Paris, -energy -review -2020 .
– (2020b), Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris -recovery.
452 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes – (2020c), World Energy Investment 2020 , IEA, Paris, -investment -2020.
– (2019a), World Energy Outlook -2019 , IEA, Paris , -outlook -2019.
– (2019b), Offshore Wind Outlook 2019, IEA, Paris, -outlook -2019.
– (2019c), Nuclear Power in a Clean Energy System , IEA, Paris, reports/nuclear- power -in-a-clean -energy -system .
– (2019d), World Energy Investment 2019, IEA, Paris, -investment -2019.
– (2019e), Africa Energy Outlook: World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris, rg/reports/africa -energy -outlook -2019 .
– (2018), World Energy Outlook -2018, IEA, Paris, world -energy -outlook -2018.
– (2017), World Energy Outlook -2017 , IEA, Paris, world -energy -outlook -2017.
– (2016a), World Energy Outlook -2016 , IEA, Paris, -outlook -2016.
– (2016b ), Energy and Air Pollution , IEA, Paris, and-airpollution IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2020), Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2019 , IRENA , Abu Dhabi, -Costs -in-2019 Kim, T. Y. and M. Karpinski (2020), Clean energy progress after the Covid- 19 crisis will need reliable supplies of critical minerals, (Commentary), IEA, clean -energy -progress -after -the-covid -19-crisis -will-need -reliable -supplies -of-criticalminerals.
NEA (National Energy Administration, China) (2020), Grid -connected operation of photovoltaic power generation in 2019 , -02/28/ c_138827923.htm, accessed 21 September 2020.
Netzentwicklungsplan (2020), Grid Development Plan: Power, , accessed 21 September 2020 OECD/NEA (Organisation for Economic Co -operation an d Development/Nuclear Energy Agency) (2016), Small Modular Reactors: Nuclear Energy Market Potential for Near -term Deployment, OECD, Paris.
REN21 (2020), Renewables 2020 Global Status Report, REN21 Secretariat, Paris.
Annex D | References 453 D Rte (Ré seau de Transport d Électricité ) (2020), RTE Base Prospectus, Euro Medium Term Note Programme, -france.com/prod/public/2020 -06/Euro%20Medium %20Term%20Note%20Programme%20%E2%80%93%20Base%20Prospectus%20juin%2020 20.pdf.
S&P Global (2019), Germany to review wind quotas for grid saturation zones , -insights/latest -news/electric -power/080619germany -to-review -wind -quotas -for-grid-saturation -zones.
Chapter 7: Outlook for fuel supply Bloomberg (2020), Bloomberg Terminal, accessed multiple times during July -September 2020.
Bank of Russia (2020), International Reserves of the Russian Federation, (database), , accessed 1 September 2020.
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), The Oil and Gas Industry in Energy Transitions, IEA, Paris , -oil-and-gas-industry -in-energy -transitions .
– (2020b), World Energy Investment 2020, IEA, Paris, -investment -2020.
– (2020c), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020: Special Report on Clean Energy Innovation, IEA, Paris , -energy -innovat ion.
– (2019), World Energy Investment 2019 , IEA, Paris , -investment -2019.
IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2020), Regional Economic Outlook Update: Middle East and Central Asia, IMF, Washington, DC.
Thomson Reuters Eikon (2020), (database), accessed multiple times during July -September 2020.
US DOE/EIA (US Department of Energy/Energy Information Administration) (2020), Assumptions to the Annual Energy Outlook 2020 , US DOE/EIA, Washington, DC.
World Nuclear Associat ion, 2020, The Nuclear Fuel Report: Expanded Summary – Global Scenarios for Demand and Supply Availability 2019 -2040, World Nuclear Association, London.
Chapter 8: A delayed recovery IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020a), World Energy Investment 2020, IEA, Paris , -energy -investment -2020.
– (2020b), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020: Special Report on Clean Energy Innovation, IEA, Paris , -energy -innovation.
IJ Global (2000), Transactions (database), -transactions , accessed multiple times in July -September 2020.
454 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes ILO (International Labour Office) (2018), Women and men in the informal economy: a statis tical picture, ILO, Geneva , .
IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2020a), World Economic Outlook Database , April 2020 Edition, IMF, Washington DC , weodata/index.aspx .
– (2020b), World Economic Outlook, June 2020: A Crisis Like No Other, An Uncertain Recovery, IMF, Washington DC , ~/media/Files/Publications/ WEO/2020/Update/June/English/WEOENG 202006.ashx?la=en.
Oxford Economics (2020), Oxford Economics Global Economic Model , August 2020 update, Oxford Economics, United Kingdom , -economicmodel .
Renewables 2020 Global Status Report, REN21 Secretariat, Paris, -2020/.
Annex B Argus Global LNG (2020): LNG markets, projects, and infrastructure, Volumes XVI 2 and 9, www.argusmedia.com .
BGR (German Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources) (2019), Energiestudie 2019, Reserven, Ressourcen und Verifügbarkeit von Energierohstoffen, (Energy Study 2019, Reserves, Resources and Availability of Energy Resources), BGR, Hannover, Germany.
BP (2020), BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2020, BP, London.
Cedigaz (2019), Cedigaz databases, Cedigaz, Rueil- Malmaison, France, www.cedigaz.org .
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020), Sustainable Recovery: World Energy Outlook Special Report , IEA, Paris, -recovery .
– (2019a), World Energy Outlook -2019 , IEA, Paris, -outlook -2019.
– (2019b), Africa Energy Outlook: Worl d Energy Outlook Special Report 2019 , IEA, Paris, -energy -outlook -2019.
– (2019c), Offshore Wind Outlook 2019, IEA, Paris, -outlook -2019.
– (2019d), Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2019 , IEA, Paris southeast -asia-energy -outlook -2019.
– (2018), World Energy Outlook -2018 , IEA, Paris, -outlook -2018.
Annex D | References 455 D IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2020), Renewable Costing Alliance, IRENA, Abu Dhabi, rg/statistics , accessed 15 July 2020.
– (2019), Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2019, IRENA, Abu Dhabi, media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2020/Jun/IRENA_Power_ Generation_Costs_2019.pdf .
IPCC (2018), Special Report Global Warming of 1.5oC, IPCC, Geneva, OGJ (Oil and Gas Journal) (2019), Worldwide reserves edge higher, OGJ 117 (1 2), Pennwell Corporation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States.
US DOE/EIA (US Department of Energy/Energy Information Adminstration) (2020), Assumptions to the Annual Energy Outlook 2020, US DOE/EIA, Washington, DC.
– (2019), U.S. Crude Oil and Natural Gas Proved Reserves, Year -end 2018, US DOE/EIA, Washington, DC.
US DOE/EIA/ARI (US Department of Energy)/(Energy Information Administration)/ (Advanced Resources International) (2013 and last updated September 2015), Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States, US DOE/EIA, Washington, DC.
USGS (United States Geological Survey) (2012a), "Assessment of Potential Additions to Conventional Oil and Gas Resources of the World (Outside the United States) from Reserve Growth", Fact Sheet 2012 –3052, USGS, Boulder, Colorado, United States.
– (2012b), "An Estimate of Undiscovered Conventional Oil and Gas Resources of the World", Fact Sheet 2012 –3042, USGS, Boulder, Colorado, United States.
Annex E | Inputs to the World Energy Model 457 Annex E Inputs to the World Energy Model General note This annex includes references of databases and publications used to provide input data to the World Energy Model (WEM) .
The IEA's own databases of energy and economic statistics provide m uch of the data used in the WEM, with IEA statistics on energy supply, transformation and demand, carbon dioxide emissions from fuel combustion, energy efficiency indicators and splits of energy demand, forming the bedrock of World Energy Outlook modelling and analysis.
Additional data from a wide range of external sources are also used to compliment IEA data and provide additional detail.
This list of databases and publications is comprehensive, but not exhaustive.
IEA databases and publications IEA (International Energy Agency) (2020 , forthcoming ), Renewable Energy Market Report 2020 , IEA, Paris.
IEA (2020), World Energy Statistics and Balances , IEA, Paris, rg/subscribe -to-data -services/world -energy -balances -and-statistics .
IEA (2020), CO 2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion, IEA, Paris, -to-data -services/co2 -emissions -statistics.
IEA (2020), Natural Gas Information , IEA, Paris, -to-data -services/natural -gas-statistics .
IEA (2020), Monthly Gas Data Service , IEA, Paris , -gas-data -service.
IEA (2020), Monthly Oil Data Serv ice, IEA, Paris, -oil-data -service.
IEA (2020), Coal Information , IEA, Paris, -to-data -services/coal -statistics .
IEA (2020), Monthly Electricity Statistics , IEA, Paris, -electricity -statistics.
IEA (2020), IEA Energy Prices , IEA, Paris, -to-data -services/prices -and-taxes.
IEA (2020), Energy Efficiency Indicators , IEA, Par is, -to-data -services/energy -efficiency -statistics.
458 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes IEA (2020), Global Energy Review 2020 , IEA, Paris, -energy -review -2020.
IEA (2020), World Energy Investment 202 0, IEA, Paris, -energy -investment -2020.
IEA (2020), SDG7: Data and Projections , IEA, Paris, -data -and-projections.
IEA (2019), Global Energy Review 2019 , IEA, Paris, -energy -review -2019.
IEA (2019), Fuel Economy in Major Car Markets: Global Fuel Economy Initiative (d atabase ), IEA, Paris, -economy -in-major -car-markets .
IEA (n.d.), IEA Subsidies (database ), IEA, Paris, -subsidies .
IEA (n.d.), Mobility Model (MoMo) (d atabase ), IEA, Paris, rg/areas -of-work/programmes -and-partnerships/the -iea-mobility -model .
External databases and publications Socioeconomic variables ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control) (2020), Situation Update Worldwide, (database) official data collecte d by Our World in Data, -cases#acknowledgements .
IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2020), World Economic Outlook: June 2020 update , mf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/06/24/WEOUpdateJune2020 .
Maddison Project Database, Bolt, J. et al.
(2018), "Rebasing 'Maddison': New income comparisons and the shape of long run economic development ", GGDC Research Memorandum; Vol.
GD -174, Groningen Growth and Development Center, Groningen, http s://core.ac.uk/reader/148337710 , accessed 18 September 2020 .
Oxford Economics (2020), Oxford Economics Global Economic Model , August 2020 update, -economic -model .
UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs) (2019), World Population Prospects 2019 , -prospects -2019- highlights.html.
UN DESA (2018), World Urbanisation Prospects 2018 , World Bank (n.d.), World Development Indicators , IEA.
Annex E | Inputs to the World Energy M odel 459 E Power ELEXON (Balancing and Settlement Code Company) (2020), Electricity data summary (database), ENTSO- E (2020), Transparency Platform (database), Global Transmission (2020), Global Electricity Transmission Report and Database, 202 0-29, -transmission -report -and-database2020-29.php.
International Atomic Energy Agency (2020), Power Reactor Information System (PRIS) (database ), NRG Expert (2019), Electricity Transmission and Distribution (database) , -market -research/electricity -transmission -anddistribution -database/ .
REE (Red Eléctrica de España) (2020), Total Load – Day Ahead / Actual (data accessed via the ENTSO- E Transparency Platform), -domain/r2/totalLoadR2/show .
RTE (Réseau de Transport d'Électricité) (2020), Electricity demand , -france.com/en/eco2mix/.
S&P Global (March 2020), World Electric Power Plants (database), S&P Market Intelligence Platform, www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence .
TERNA (Transmission operator of Italy) (2020), Transparency report: The dashboard, -system/transparency -report .
Industry Fastmarkets RISI (n.d.), Pulp, Paper and Packaging, -paper -packaging/ .
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations) (n.d.), FAOSTAT Data, #data .
Global Cement (2020), Global Cement Directory 2020 , .
IHS Markit (n.d.), Chemical , ndustry/chemical.html .
International Aluminium Institute (2020), World Aluminium Statistics , -aluminium.org/statistics/ .
International Fertilizer Association (n.d.), IFASTAT (database), .
Light Metal Age (n.d.), Resources , -section/ .
Methanol Market Services Asia (n.d.), (database), IEA.
460 World Energy Outlook 2020 | Annexes Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (Japan) (2020), METI Statistics Report, .
S&P Global (2020), Platts Global Polyolefins Outlook , .
UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs) (n.d.), UN Comtrade (database ), US Geological Survey (2020), Commodity Statistics and Information , National Minerals Information Center , .
World Bureau of Metal Statistics (n.d), (database), -bureau.com/services.asp .
World Steel Association (2020), World Steel in Figures 2020, -details~World -Steel -inFigures -2020~PRODUCT~World -Steel -in-Figures -2020~.html.
Transport LMC Aut omotive (n.d.), LMC Automotive Forecasting , -auto.com/ .
Jato Dynamics (n.d.), s/jato -analysis -reporting/.
OAG (Official Aviation Guide ) (n.d.), OAG (database), .
EV Volumes (2020), Electric Vehicle World Sales (database ), -volumes.com/ .
Buildin gs and energy access Latin American Energy Organisation (OLADE) (n.d.), Electricity Access (database) , .
National Bureau of Statistics China (2020), China Statistical Yearbook 2019 .
National Statistical Office (India) (2019), Drinking Water, Sanitation, Hygiene and Housing Condition s in India , ort_584_final_0.pdf.
Odysee (n.d.), Odysee (database ), -mure.eu/energy -efficiency -database.html.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (2018), 2015 RECS (Residential Energy Consumption Survey) Survey Data, World Health Organization (WHO) (2020) , Household Energy Database , -energy -database/en/.
Annex E | Inputs to the World Energy Model 461 E Energy supply and energy investment BGR (2019), (German Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources) (2019), Energiestudie 2019, Reserven, Ressourcen und Verfügbarkeit von Energierohstoffen, (Energy Study 2019, Reserves, Resources and Availability of Energy Resources), BGR, Hannover, Germany, summary_en.html .
BP (2020), Statistical Review of World Energy 2020 , BP, London , global/corporate/energy -economics/statistical -review -of-world -energy.html .
Bloomberg Terminal (n.d.), -terminal .
Cedigaz (2020), Cedigaz (databases) , CRU (n.d.), Coal (d atabas es), Damodaran (2020), Damodaran O nline (financial data ), ~adamodar/.
Bundesnetzagentur|SMARD.de (2020), Marketdata (database) , -market -data .
ICIS LNG Edge (2020), (database).
IHS Markit (n.d.), Coal (databases) , .
IJ Global (n.d.), Transaction (database ), -transactions .
Kayrros (2020), (data analytics) , Rystad En ergy (2020), d atabases, Thomson Reuters (n.d. ), Eikon (financial data platform), US Energy Information Administration (2020), (d atabases ), IEA.
All rights reserved.This publication reflects the views of the IEA Secretariat but does not necessarily reflect those of individual IEA member countries.
The IEA makes no representation or warranty, express or implied, in respect of the publication's contents (including its completeness or accuracy) and shall not be responsible for any use of, or reliance on, the publication.
Unless otherwise indicated, all material presented in figures and tables are derived from IEA data and analysis.
This publication and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any t erritory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
IEA Publications International Energy Agency Website: www.iea.org Contact information: www.iea.org/about/contact Typeset in France by IEA – Octo ber 2020 Cover design: IEA Photo credits: © Shutterstock 9HSTCQE*eejcdh+World Energy Outlook 2020 The World Energy Outlook, the IEA's flagship publication, provides a comprehensive view of how the global energy system could develop in the coming decades.
This year's exceptional circumstances require an exceptional approach.
The usual long-term modelling horizons are kept but the focus for this new Outlook is firmly on the next ten years, exploring in detail the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic on the energy sector and the near-term actions that could accelerate clean energy transitions.
The analysis targets the key uncertainties facing the energy sector in relation to the duration of the pandemic and its implications, while mapping out the choices that would pave the way towards a sustainable recovery.
The strategic insights from the WEO-2020 are based on detailed modelling of different potential pathways out of the crisis, covering all regions, fuels and technologies and using the latest data on energy markets, policies and costs.
iea.org/weo €120 ISBN 978-92-64-44923-7 ISSN 2072-5302
