 Innovation for Development A DISCUSSION OF THE ISSUES AND AN OVERVI EW OF WORK OF THE OECD DIRECTOR ATE FOR SCIENCE , TECHNOLOGY AND INDUS TRY May 2012 Innovation for Development A DISCUSSION OF THE ISSUES AND AN OVERVIEW OF WORK OF THE OECD DIRECTOR ATE FOR SCIENCE , TECHNOLOGY AND INDUS TRY May 2012 Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development (OECD) The OECD is a unique forum where governments work together to address the economic, social and environmental challenges of globalisation.
The OECD is also at the forefront of efforts to understand and to help governments respond to new developments and concerns, such as corporate governance, the information economy and the challenges of an ageing population.
The Organisation provides a setting where governments can compare policy experiences, seek answers to common problems, identify good practice and work to co-ordinate domestic and international policies.
The OECD member countries are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Ge rmany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The European Union takes part in the work of the OECD.
OECD Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry (DSTI) The Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry leads the OECD's work on knowledge -based sources of economic and social growth and, more specifically, on the translation of science, technology and knowledge into innovation.
Contact us For further information about our work on innovation for development or to send us comments please write to: caroline.paunov@oecd.org inno4dev@oecd.org © OECD 2012 Cover photo: © Christopher Meder – Fotolia.com 3 About this booklet This booklet discusses the relevance of innovation for development and several of the challenges that result for developing and emerging economies.
It also provides an overview of work conducted at the OECD Directorate of Science, Technology and Industry, notably incl uding ongoing activities in support of the OECD Strategy on Development .
It also provides an overview of work related to statistics and the availability of OECD databases on innovation that cover developing and emerging economies.
Contents Innovation matters for development 4 Main topics of work on innovation for development 9 1.
The contribution of innovation to economic growth and well- being 10 2.
The impact of globalisation on development and innovation 13 3.
Education, skills and human capital 18 5.
Institutional frameworks for innovation policy 22 OECD statistics on science, technology and innovation 25 Databases on innovation and their coverage of developing and emerging economies 27 4 Innovation matters for development Innovation can make a difference in addressing urgent developmental challenges such as provi ding access to drinking water, eradicating neglected diseases or reducing hunger.
The transfer and, when necessary, adaptation of technologies developed in developed countries can often contribute significantly to these goals.
Substantial research efforts are needed to find solutions that address other global challenges.
Effective international co -operation that involves both public and private bodies is an important mechanism for finding these muchneeded solutions.
Moreover, one of the important lessons of the past two decades has been the pivotal role of innovation in economic development.
The build -up o f innovation capacities has played a central role in the growth dynamics of successful developing countries .
These countries have recognised that innovation is not just about high -technology products and that innovation capacity has to be built early in the development process in order to possess the learning ca pacities that will allow "catch up" to happen.
They also need innovation capacity and local innovations to address challenges specific to their local contexts (e.g.
Ultimately a successful development strategy has to build extensive innovation capacities to foster growth.
While innovation is important at all stages of development, different types of innovation play different roles at various stages.
In earlier stages, incremental innovation is often associated with the adoption of foreign technology, and social innovation can improve the effectiveness of business and public services.
High -technology R&D -based innovation matters at later stages of dev elopment, when it is both a factor of competitiveness and of learning (which allows for completing the "catch -up" process).
The following table provides a schematic overview of various aspects of innovation for various categories of countries.
Depending on the support mechanisms used, the types of innovation and the main agents involved differ somewhat.
5 Why innovation is important for developing and emerging countries Country category Mechanism/objective of innovation Type/source of innovation and main agents involved Developing/ lowincome countries and emerging and middleincome countries • Adoption requires adaptation: Innovation needs to respond to specific "local" conditions for outcomes • Examples: New plant varieties for agriculture, efforts at developing new methods for mineral extraction in the Chilean copper industry to satisfy local needs • Incremental innovation based on foreign innovations and technologies • Agents: universities and research institutes, leading private businesses, esp.
those w ith exposure to foreign markets and businesses • Inclusive innovation: for/by low - and middleincome households to improve welfare and access to business opportunities • Examples: India (nano cars; grassroots innovation), mobile banking services .
• Incremental innovation based on foreign technology and/or local, traditional knowledge generated "out of necessity" • Social innovation helping to introduce technical innovations in communities • Agents: NGOs, small firms, public and private associations engaged in disseminating knowledge via networks, private, often large businesses Mainly middleincome countries but also some opportunities for developing /lowincome countries • Build up innovation capacities that will be key for reaching the world technological frontier in many industries, esp.
relevant to avoid "middle- income traps" • Example: Korea increased R&D efforts in the 1990s • Incremental and radical innovation capacity to compete with leading world innovators • Agents: Requires full development of innovation systems involving diasporas as a connector • Address environmental, health and social challenges through global innovation efforts and local efforts to address them • Example: Innovations concerning soil • Major innovations and scientific research conducted in global partnerships but also marginal innovations to address welfare of poor people • Agents: Public and private universities and research institutions connected to global networks but also major private businesses operating in these sectors • Build -up niche competencies i.e.
growth/ exports in sectors of comparative advantage • Example: Colombian and Ecuadorian flower industry • Malaysia's palm oil sector • Incremental innovations based on applying foreign innovations and technologies strategically t o support industrial development • Agents: Public institutions to address coordination challenges, private sector initiative including foreign companies …/… 6 Why innovation is important for developing and emerging countries (cont'd) Country category Mechanism/objective of innovation Type/source of innovation and main agents involved Mainly emerging/ middle- income countries after initial progress on dimensions above • Climb the value ladder in global value chains • Example: Automotive industry in Malaysia, India's software industry • Incremental and radical innovation capacity to differentiate contributions • Agents: Involves private sectors with support from public agents, intermediaries, diasporas can play a central role, large firms can be importan t • Keep competitiveness in frontier industries when the country is already at the frontier • Example: Brazilian company Embraer as well as leading R&D firms from emerging economies • Innovation is identical to developed countries exposed to developments in the global market • Agents: Involves mainly private sector in interaction with public research institutions and universities, global partnerships often equally of relevance, role of l arge firms Scientific articles and co- authorship, 1998 and 2008 Source: OECD calculations, based on Scopus Custom Data, Elsevier, December 2009.
0369121518 North America Europe Far East & Oceania (excluding China) Brazil Russian Federation India China%1998 2008 7 Several emerging economies – and China in particular – have become significant actors in the global innovation system.
There is evidence that R&D played a key role in the take- off of Asian economies such as China, India and Korea.
What is more, many emer ging economies have in dustries or firms that are at the technology frontier and need to innovate to compete.
Increased participation in global innovation networks is evident in China's (but also, to a lesser extent, India's, Brazil's and Russia's) increased share of co-authorships of scientific publications with leading OECD economies, in particular the United States (see figure at left ).
On the input side , China's subst antial R&D budget is noteworthy .
Several developments may offer opportunities for developing and emerging economi es to engage in innovation: • As some emerging countries become more innovative, opportunities for new entrants are created.
The vertical fragmentation of value chains and the consequent division of labour in East Asia seems to have increased as other countries (Cambodia, the Philippines, Vietnam) take over lower value activities from China (the "flying geese" development model).
Chinese firms' investments in Africa have also altered local business opportu nities.
The increase in South -South co -operation activities is another factor ( e.g.
the creation of the International Science, Technology and Innovation Centre for South -South Cooperation).
There are also potential challenges (such as the potential impact on innovation systems of a manufacturing sector's growing demand for primary inputs as China , for example ).
• Information and communication technologies (ICTs) offer many opportunities for innovation .
Moreover, since the dissemination of knowledge plays a pivotal role for innovation ICTs could among other contributions make a substantial difference to firms' technology uptake and innovation performance.
In fact, ICTs could be a powerful means to help lower - and middleincome groups and their businesses overcome barriers to technology uptake and innovation performance by broadening the group of innovators.
The success of mobile bank ing in developing countries is one such example of a business model built on ICTs.
8 • Global value chains offer a potentially different framework for development.
Countries such as Korea industrialised early through the development of vertically inte grated industries (which produced both intermediates and final products).
Countries that start to industrialise today may choose a different development path and specialise in specific activities within value chains .
Sequentially upgrading such activities within value chains will likely require re thinking industry policy and the role of government.
To date, however, most discussions of innovation have not investigated such trajectories (see also discussion on globalisation below) .
• Increasingly, service -based economies call into q uestion manufacturingbased development strategies.
"Dematerialised" innovation ( e.g.
product design) is more relevant today for countries' positioning in global value chains.
However, it is also argued that a manufacturing basis is still necessary for dev elopment.
To date no country has developed successfully without one.
The differential growth paths of China, which focuses strongly on its manufacturing base, and India, which has focused on information technology (IT) services, among others, might offer insights on the question.
• Greater openness to trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) in the context of international treaties necessarily cr eates a very different context from that of the past.
Many developing and emerging countries are members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and must comply with the rules imposed on trade policy.
Further reading • OECD ( forthcoming ), "Innovation for Development: The Challenges Ahead ", chapter in OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2012 , OECD Publishing, Paris.
9 Main topics of work on innovation for development Working with OECD member countries and through active dialogue with nonmember countries, DSTI has accumulated wide expertise on innovation in the context of high -income economies.
This resulted in the OECD Innovation Strategy , which formulates a set of policy priorities that also apply to emerging and developing countries.
These include: framework conditions that encourage entrepr eneurship and the mobility of factors on all markets; openness to trade as global networks of innovation emerge; public and private investment in human capital, R&D and other intangibles.
These principles need to be applied in ways which accommodate the different prevailing conditions of emerging and developing countries to support innovation in these economies.
Several projects that focused specifically on developing and emerging economie s are briefly described in this section.
At the 2011 Ministerial Council Meeting , ministers welcomed a new comprehensive approach to development acros s the OECD.
They endorsed the f ramework for an OECD Strategy for Development : "We commit to launch a new comprehensive approach to development across our Organisation entailing greater collaboration, including sharing policy successes and failures and engaging in mutual learning, as well as deepening partnerships between the Organisation and deve loping countries that want to engage ."
(OECD 50th Anniversary Vision Statement) It aims to assemble the collective OECD knowledge on development processes and policies, and to adapt the broad experience of OECD member countries to the developing world .
The strategy will regroup a divers e set of policies and make them coherent with each other.
Innovation and sustainable sources of growth will play a central role.
Further reading • OECD (2010), The OECD Innovation Strategy: Getting a Head Start on Tomorrow , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2010), Measuring Innovation: A New Perspective , OECD Publishing, Paris.
10 Ongoing work on innovation for development focuses on six themes: 1.
The contribution of innovation to economic growth and well -being 2.
The impact of globalisation on development and innovation 3.
Education, skills and human capital 5.
Institutional frameworks for innovation policy 1.
The contribution of innovation to economic growth and well -being As part of the broader policy agenda, inno vation helps to drive economic growth and address socio- economic challenges such as poverty and health.
Many growth -enhancing innovations also address social challenges.
For example, poverty -related effects can substantially influence opportunities for engaging in entrepreneurial activities ( e.g.
ill health reduces the potential productivity of workers), so that addressing social challenges can also enco urage growth processes.
In India's Green Revolution of the 1960s, innovation led to the introduction of high -yield varieties and seeds and increased use of fertilisers and irrigation and this resulted in a substantial increase in grain production.
This not only raised agricultural productivity but also directly addresses food scarcity among the country's poor.
In spite of its demonstrated benefits for meeting the immediate and long- term developmental goals of emerging and developing countries, the relevanc e of innovation for these economies is sometimes questioned.
Such thinking is often based on a narrow view of innovation as high- technology.
It is true that an exclusive focus on high -technology industries ("high -tech myopia") can be costly if the potentia l for innovat ion in other sectors is ignored .
Countries can incur high costs without reaping any benefits if they choose sectors that require expertise they lack and are internationally highly competitive.
11 Yet innovation takes place in different sectors including services, agriculture and mining .
Many opportunities for innovation have arisen in lowertechnology sectors with high export opportunities, e.g.
the production of palm oil and derivative products in Malaysia.
Also, innovation in agriculture is particularly relevant for addressing socioeconomic challenges and fostering growth at the same time.
There is evidence that agricultural R&D has a greater impact on poverty reduction than most other public inve stments.
Policy questions include: • How do framework conditions which favour innovation ( e.g.
have to be adapted to the specific conditions of emerging and developing countries?
What is the relationship between innovation and other priorities for development such as education, physical infrastructure, ICTs, etc.?
• What types of financial arrangements can accommodate the specific conditions of developing countries ( e.g.
the need for small -scale investments, weaker law enforcement, etc.)?
• What are the obstacles for the broader deployment of modern technology across the economy (including in traditional sectors) in developing countries?
What are implications for government policy?
Completed work Innovation is essential for development as it is a driver of economic growth.
This is the main the me of the OECD/World Bank publi cation Innovation and Growth: Chasing a Moving Frontier .
Innovation and the Development Agenda , a follow -up publication of the OECD Innovation Strategy, emphasises how innovation should be a central priority on the international development policy agenda.
Also, several policy -relevant aspects of the often disadvantageous framework conditions for businesses are discussed.
Integrating Science and Technology into Development Policies: An International Perspective explores the variety of potential contributions of innovation to economic, social and environmental development.
It focuses mainly on the direct role new technologies can, if adopted, play to address water and electricity access questions.
Moreover, a 2009 publication closely explores such issues by focusing on challenges for innovation to reduce the high incidence of death from infectious diseases.
Also, the Global Science Forum (GSF) has contributed to a related question by exploring how scientific research collaboration between developed and developing countries financed through Official 12 Development Assistance (ODA) can be optimised.
A central focus is on h ow more equal partnerships with wider opportunities for sustained capacity -building can be established and how developed countries can benefit more from such research co -operation.
Global challenges are not new but have increased in scope and are more urgent.
Science, technology and innovation (STI) can play an essential role in meeting them.
However, STI co- operative efforts at the international level can be hard to achieve and call s for effective governance mechanisms.
The f orthcoming publication International Co -operation in Science, Technology and Innovation : Meeting Global Challenges through Better Governance shows that the institutional framework for priority setting as well as funding and spending mechanisms should be flexible, knowledge sharing and intellectual property require a tailored approach, putting STI into practice requires outreach and international collaboration needs to include a range of actors regardless of their STI capacities.
Ongoing projects A follow -on study is ongoing at the Global Science Forum with particular focus on research cooperation between developed and developing countries in the area of climate change adaptation and biodiversity .
Maximizing the contributions of innovation is at the heart of the OECD indepth studies of innovation systems of individual countries.
The idiosyncrasies of national innovation systems – a result of diverging historical, political, social and economic dev elopments – are widely recognised.
To guide policy makers, the OECD produces in -depth studies of innovation systems of individual countries .
A particular focus is placed on providing concrete recommendations on how to improve a wide range of public policie s that affect countries' innovation performance.
Emerging and developing countries reviewed include Chile, China, Mexico, the Russian Federation and South Africa.
Currently two OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy examine those key issues for Vietnam and Southeast Asia.
13 The Innovation Policy Platform (IPP), jointly developed by the OECD and the World Bank, aims to build be a web -based, open -data interactive platform to facilitate collective learning processes around science, technology and innovation (STI) policy.
Its goal is to provide its users with support in analy sing innovation systems and policies and in shaping future policy designs.
It will also facilitate collective learning processes of both the principles as well as the "howto" aspects of innovation policy, tailored to the needs of developing and developed countries.
Efforts are underway to build a prototype IPP site for an initial beta launch in early 2013.
Further reading • OECD (2007), Integrating Science and Technology int o Development Policies: An International Perspective , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2009), Coherence for Health: Innovation for Medicines for Infectious Diseases, OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD/World Bank (2009), Innovation and Growth: Chasing a Moving Frontier , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD/IDRC (2010), Innovation and the Development Agenda , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2010), The OECD Innovation Strategy: Getting a Head Start on Tomorrow , OECD Publishing, Paris .
• OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: South Africa (2007), Chile (2007), China (2008), Mexico (2009), Peru (2011), Russian Federation (2011), OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2011), " Opportunities, Challenges and Good Practices in International Research Co-operation between Developed and Developing Countries ", OECD, Paris.
• OECD (forthcoming), International Co -operation in Sci ence, Technology and Innovation: Meeting Global Challenges through Better Governance, OECD Publishing , Paris .
The impact of globalisation on development and innovation There are demonstrated benefits from trade openness and FDI for developing and emerging economies' innovation performance which include the following: • First, opening national markets to foreign competitors' products is a powerful means of strengthening competition and decreasing the market power of domestic producers.
Firms' also react to competition by improving total factor productivity and innovation perf ormance.
• Second, openness facilitates access to foreign know -how and technologies.
14 • Third, trade integration allows for economies of scale and specialisation.
• Fourth , trade openness leads economi es to specialise in sectors which have a com parative advantage and can therefore foster the welfare- enhancing restructuring of c ountries' production and innovation structures .
However, while openness offers opportunities to tap into global knowledge stocks, the development of innovation capacity in national industries requires supportive policy measures (e.g.
access to finance, provision of suitable skills).
Many factors can be relevant for building innovation capacity; they include providing access to finance for businesses, easing conditions for entrepreneurship, and improving access to skilled human capital.
Complementary policies are critical for generating the desired benefits , specifically for more inclusive development processes.
There is also an open debate on how specialisation patterns induced exclusively by market forces might affect the build- up of innovation capabilities, and consequently, whether industrial policies that seek to target specific sectors would enhance the development of domestic innovation.
A changing dimen sion of trade is worth emphasising: t he increasing segmentation of production processes across countries – global value chains – creates new challenges for traditional trade and innovation policies: 1.
They may offer a novel approach to development if it is no longer necessary to build full industrial production capacities to produce leading products and if specialisation in certain sub- activities would provide conditions for success.
The increasingly prevalent fragmentation of production processes, as firms exploit new technological opportunities, could increase exposure to foreign knowledge and know -how.
However, as it becomes easier to shift production across countries, specialisation needs to be innovati ve to be at the world frontier challenging developin g countries.
The issue of sectoral specialisation becomes less relevant than the segment of production within sectors.
For instance, countries involved in the production of sophisticated technical products such as iPods will need to move 15 towards activiti es with higher value added ( e.g.
from product assembly to production of intermediate inputs to design).
However, countries may also be locked into "modularity traps", i.e.
activities with limited opportunities for capability upgrading.
Multinationals and large firms are often the dominant actors.
Engaging in global value chains will therefore require linking with them.
Market power along the value chain and payoffs to smaller producers become important issues for the dynamics of inclusiv e development.
Policy questions include : • What role do emerging and developing countries really play in global value chains?
What are their actual contributions?
How has their role changed over recent years?
• How do global value chains facilitate or hamp er innovation in developing countries?
• What economic mechanisms and policies facilitate moving up the value chain (i.e.
to create larger value -added by engaging in more technology and knowledge -intensive activities )?
• What national policies enable developing countries to access global knowledge networks and move up global value chains ?
• What is the right balance between technology transfer and national innovation?
• What intellectual property rights (IPR) systems consistent with international treaties can optimise both access to foreign technology and indigenous innovation ?
Ongoing projects OECD work on global value chains (GVCs) is concerned with the increasing importance of GVCs and their impact on national economies.
This research focuses on issues such as the role of emerging economies in GVCs, national competitiveness, the importance of intangible assets for GVC upgrad ing, GVCs and trade policy, and GVCs and global systemic risk.
An OECD report will bring the different results together and focus on the policy implications .
16 Closely related to the work on trade in GVCs, a joint OECD -WTO initiative on Trade in Value Added develops new measures of trade in order to have a better picture of the global trade landscape.
Owing to the increasing importance of GVCs traditional trade statistics suffer from multiple counting of intermediates.
The 2012 project aims to develop (bilateral) trade statistics in value added ( i.e.
how much value each country adds to imported intermediates) instead of gross production terms.
Inclusive development and innovation While countries' priorities differ, a source of rising concern for many has been the recognition that the growth process is insufficiently inclusive.
Beyond well- known differences across countries, within -country inequalities in living conditions, income and capabilities exist across regions, economic activities and social groups but also within each of these groups.
Inequalities are often much greater in developing and emerging economies as the gap between the most advantaged and the most disadvantaged is wider and as those at the bottom of the distribution face more extreme living conditions than those in developed economies.
"Innovation" is related to "inclusion" in the following ways: • First, "inclusive innovation" can provide solutions for reducing ga ps in living standards between the richest and poorest groups in society.
Such innovations typically consist of producing cheaper (often simplified) versions of existing often sophisticated products for purchase by lower -income groups ("frugal innovation" or "innovation for low and middle -income groups") .
Many innovations, especially those that address the health and nutritional needs of the poorest, can improve their living conditions substantially, although price remains an issue.
Inclusive innovation ca n boost the welfare of the poorest by providing innovative products that are (due to their lower price) accessible to a wider share of the population.
Innovation can in that way help provide opportunities in addition to the two well -known traditional appro aches for doing so: redistributive policies and international aid.
An attractive element of this approach is the idea that this may create a market for private businesses and thus be self -sustaining.
17 • Second, some innovations facilitate grassroots entrepr eneurship and could help integrate previously marginalised groups into circuits of economic activities ( "innovation by low - and middle -income groups" ).
It often involves either the exploitation of traditional knowledge (agriculture, craftsmanship) or an a dapted use of modern technology that most people can afford (mobile phones are the archetype).
There is often value in local innovations that are born out of necessity and can help improve living standards more than some technical innovations.
A different aspect of the grassroots or frugal innovation debate is whether this can enable the entrepreneurship that would allow the poor to improve their living standards and incomes.
Many groups at the bottom of the pyramid are excluded from the formal economy and operate on rural markets that are poorly serviced, dominated by the informal economy and rela tively inefficient.
If new innovations such as mobile phones can enable these groups to become integrate d into the formal economy they would do more than marginall y improve their well -being: they would offer an opportunity for low - and middle -income groups to share in future growth dynamics.
• Third, firms do not engage in innovation to the same extent.
Differences among firms' innovation activities and use of new technologies translate into substantial productivity gaps.
That is, some firms operate less efficiently due to the use of outdated technologies while some high ly efficient "frontier " firms operate with up -to-date leading technologies.
The aggregate cost to the economy is substantial.
The resulting inequalities in wages have an impact on the distribution of income ( "innovation and its impacts on low- and middle -income groups" ).
Such inequalities are even more marked in developing and emerging economies.
The lack of "inclusiveness" ( i.e.
wide dispersion of productivity and income) is a fundamental reason for the lack of convergence between developing and developed countries.
An increasing number of developing and emerging country firms are responsible for major R&D investments and tend to account for the bulk of national investments.
Such "islands of excellence", however, do not represent the majority of firms and fail to produce the overall transfer and dissemination that would boost overall performance.
Policy questions include: • What types of innovation are inclusive and how does inclusiveness work?
• How can policies encourage innovation in the informal sector?
• How can the links between modern and tra ditional, often informal sector s be strengthened ?
18 • What can government do to support firms building their internal absorptive and innovative capacity?
• What specific measures need to be taken in order to integrate more women and ethnic minorities in innovative activities?
• Is there a market for "innovation s for lower - and middle -income groups" so that those innovation would not depend on public support?
• Should governments seek to develop high -tech leaders or should they opt for a more general innovation support policy?
Current projects The OECD Project on Inclusive Innovation will produce new evidence on inclusive innovation and develop policy options.
The outcomes of the initial project phase in 2012 will be a pilot study, which will be launched at a dedicated event at the 6th Conference on Micro Evidenc e on Innovation and Development (MEIDE) on November 21- 23 in Cape Town, South Africa.
This joint conference with the United Nations University UNU -MERIT and the South African Cent re for Science, Technology & Innovation Indicators (CeSTII) will bring togeth er policy analysts to discuss policy implications as well as identify future cooperation on the project.
Higher education, skills and human capital Skills play a crucial role for innovation.
Low educational attainment and lack of quality and capacity of the educational sector at all levels (including vocational training and adult education) can hold back innovation.
With limited budgets for education on e difficulty is in striking the right balance between the trai ning of highskill specialist s – which is costly, often concentrated in a few disciplines but essential for the promotion of innovation at the international level – and training at the primary and secondary levels – which, if absent, reduces absorptive capacities of the economy and the development of grassroot businesses.
Investment in human capital should go hand -in-hand with th e creation of job opportunities .
Otherwise well-qualified professionals are likely to contribute much less to boosting development as they suffer from underemployment.
Finally, t he international di mension is important for many developing 19 and emerging economies as a source for capacity -building (notably, by sending students and researchers to foreign universities).
It can, however, also be a threat since the most skilled might choose to go and stay abroad if local circumstances do not provide sufficient opportunities.
Improving local research and employment conditions for the highly skilled is essential to avoid emigration of the brightest.
Policy questions • What is the correct balance right between spending on basic and advanced education, in accordance with the level of development of a country?
• What policies enable developing countries to promote and benefit from the international experience of high level national scientists and innovators (brain circulation) while avoiding brain drain?
• What policies are needed to foster the contributions of hig her education and research institutions towards development?
Current projects The primary objective of the Programme on Innovation, Higher Education and Research for Development (IHERD) , a four-year project funded by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida), is to promote evidence -based policy in the area of research management and research and innovation policies in the context of development.
The project also seeks to promote knowledge sharing to reflect on the new real ity of the global economy where new key players have emerged.
This will be achieved through stimulating a shift in the research agenda by fostering links between front line research and policy, by working with leading researchers, research institutions, policy makers and research man agers from different economic contexts.
The OECD aims to provide a global resource for public policy advice on enhancing the role of innovation and research in the social and economic development of middle - and low -income countr ies, through improved governance, management and evaluation of research and innovation.
ICT s for development Information and communication technologies (ICTs) drastically reduce the cost of accessing or diffusing information.
For example, they enable scientists and innovators from the developing world to access scientific or business know ledge from all around the world more easily, and help entrepreneurs to reach more customers and broaden their potential market.
This is critical for many emer ging and developing coun tries where market size and transport or informa tion infra structure often restrain business productivity and growth.
ICT s have also facilitated the emergence of global value chains, which are an engine for industrial and technological development in a number of countries, allowing technology transfers from multinational firms.
Policy questions • What conditions, notably in terms of public and private investment, regulation and competition policy, facilitate the diffusion of ICTs in developing countries?
• What can government do to increase the benefit that society derives from ICTs, for knowledge generation and diffusion as well as innovation?
• What are the opportunities ICTs and mobile phones innovation offer for inclusive development Completed work ICTs are a key channel for the transfer of ideas as they extend reach to remote locations and previously marginalized people.
They can be essential for enabling to start off innovation processes as new ideas are disseminated more widely and put to new uses.
I CTs themselves offer many opportunities for innovation.
The two publications below discuss the challenges to be addressed to unleash the po tential of ICTs.
They point to the importance competitive markets have played in stimulating a well -developed ICT in frastructure over the last decades across the OECD and beyond.
They also emphasise policies for 21 supporting ICT access to low-income groups.
This is a challenge that will require more than infra structure policies; notably access to better quality education to ensure an increasing number of people can take full advantage of ICTs.
They also discuss examples of I CT-enabled business opportunities for low-income groups.
Moreover, a 2012 study conducted jointly with UNESCO and the Internet Society (ISOC) finds that the development of network i nfrastructure and local content as well as the development of international bandwidth and the price of local Internet access are strongly positively correlated .
This potentially points to that these three elements are connected and feed into each other in a virtuous circle.
The inter -linkages between the different elements lead to three key lines of policy considerations evolving out of this research: fostering content development, expanding connectivity and promoting Internet access competition.
Importantly, widely available and affordable telecommunication infrastructure and services is a key condition for reaping benefits from ICTs .
To that aim, the OECD has reviewed Mexico's telecommunicat ions policy and regulation and put forward a number of recommendations.
These recommendations largely reflect best practices in OECD countries which have helped develop compe tition.
The study has led to extensive national debates and emphasises the cost to the Mexican economy of its dysfuncti onal telecommunication market .
In particular, the lack of competition imposes a burden on consumers and businesses.
Moreover, the existi ng regulatory framework falls seriously short of OECD best practice with respect to regulatory certainty and timeliness.
Current projects The OECD Project on Inclusive Innovation (see description above ) will develop a specific module on ICTs for inclusive development .
One of the major objectives is to move beyond case study evidence by providing a quantitative assessment of the opportunities ICTs offer for entrepreneurship across different income groups across the globe.
The analysis will, therefore, allow identifying policies to maximise benefits from ICTs.
In order to do so the report will also incorporate a review aimed at analysing various key parts of the Internet economy, as well as new developments and innovation models and how these can contribute to the further development of the Internet economy in developing and emerging countries.
It will also look at the skills that are already available and those needed as they play a pivotal role.
22 Further reading • InfoDev/OECD (2009), ICTs for Development: Improving Policy Coherence , OECD.
• OECD (2009), The Development Dimension: Internet Access for Development, OECD.
• OECD (2011), OECD Review of Telecommunication Policy and Regulation in Mexico , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD/ISOC/UNESCO (forthcoming), The Relationship between Local Content, Internet Development and Access Prices .
Institutional frameworks for innovation policy It is widely recognised that innovation requires certain types of public sector support.
In developing and emerging countries, public institutions are weaker and generate a number of failures that do not affect developed countries to the same extent.
Lack of information – such as, for example, paucity of statistics on the informal sector – lack of coordination across agencies and lack of stable human resources reduce the ability of public institutions to play their role as efficiently as possible.
Policies which are fine "in theory" might simpl y not work in that context: for instance, an R&D tax credit has little sense when tax collection is at best partial.
It is important that policy messages addressed to developing countries take into account the level of development of their institutions and administrative system – for their success , policies must be "resilient" to weak institutions .
Encouraging innovation requires that an appropr iate IPR system be in place .
A number of issues have to be taken into account when thinking of the IPR system in developing countries, like the relatively weak science base, the importance of incremental, "informal" innovation, the major role of knowledge imports, the concerns for inclusiveness , etc.
Hence, in the context of their own development and of the TRIPs, developing countries need now to pay more attention than before to IP.
23 Policy questions • What policy approaches towards innovation are taken in across emerging and developing economies?
• What "resilient" policies can contribute to improving framework conditions in developing countries?
• How can public institutions in support of innovation including intellectual property (IP) systems be strengthened?
• What policy instruments can be used for dealing with the informal sector?
• What adaptations are needed to render good practices identified in more advanced countries suitable to emerging and developing economies?
Current projects The OECD is currently develop ing a framework for analysing IP system s in developing and emerging economies.
T he project will explicitly seek to overcome the insufficient linkage between economic and legal perspectives on IP.
The objective is to introduce countries' economic dimension s (incl.
their level of development and economic structural) to go beyond generic approaches on IP and provide practical policy advice on how to best design the national IP system in order to foster indigenous innovation and knowledge tr ansfers.
The pilot study will likely focus on Colombia and Indo nesia.
The variety of public institutions involved in innovation policy are at the centre stage of the OECD Innovation Policy Reviews given country -specific dimensions including in ongoing studies of Viet-nam and Southeast Asia.
Also, the pur pose of the Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2012 is to provide an overview of policy approaches covering in addition to OECD countries ove rviews for a variety of emerging economies including Argentina, China, Colombia, India, Egypt and Colombia.
24 Some additional information on the OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy What is the objective of the reviews?
Each review aims at helping the country examined to: • Raise awareness of innovation as an important driver of socio- economic development .
• Stimulate dialogue among the main stakeholders involved in innovation.
• Reform institutional arrangements and governance mechanisms for innovation and s trengthen the coordination of innovation -related policies .
• Improve the innovation policy mix and individual policy instruments .
Core items include: • Innovation and economic performance, • International benchmarking of innovation performance, • Framework conditions for innovation and knowledge infrastructure, • Human resources in science and technology , • Promotion of business R&D and innovation, • Industry -science linkages , • Internationalisation of R&D , • Governance of the innovation system, evaluation.
Special emphasis is placed on themes reflecting the needs of the country under review.
What is the country review process?
OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy usually comprise the following steps: • Agreement on the terms of reference and preparation of a background report by the reviewed country .
• The OECD review team carries out a fact -finding mission and prepares a draft report .
• Consultations with the reviewed country and reporting/peer review based on the draft report .
• The review is published by the OECD and findings with recommendations are presented in the country reviewed.
• Follow -up interactions include assessment of impacts of the reviews and assistance in implementing policy reforms .
• The reviews are usually presented at high- level national events in the country examined.
• Impacts differ across countries.
In some, reviews affected policy makers' approach to innovation policy whereas in others specific recommendations were implemented.
25 OECD statistics on science, technology and innovation The OECD provides indicators on various aspects of innovation which often includes data from developing and emerging countries (see detailed summary at the back of this brochure).
The OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard and the OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook – published alternatively every other year – explore trends in innovation performance and policy developments for OECD and major emerging economies.
The 2012 edition of the STI Outl ook discusses the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India , China and South Africa ) as well as Argentina, Colombia and Egypt.
The National Experts on Science and Techno logy Indi cators (NESTI) group has played a substantial role in setting international standards fo r innovation and R&D statistics.
Three manuals are worth emphasising: • The Oslo Manual , a joint publication with Eurostat, has set international standards for collecting and interpreting innovation statistics of firms .
The latest edition includes an annex on developing countries ; it emphasises that the survey design in these economies requires striking the right balance between collecting comparable statistics for international benchmarking and cap turing specific characteristics of innovation in developing and emerging economies.
• The Frascati Manual , an internationally acknowledged standard, deals with measuring resources – expenditure and personnel devoted to R&D in higher education , government , business enterprise , private and non -profit organisations .
Despite the Frascati Manual's widespread use, sign ificant usage gaps remain, especially in Africa, Central and South Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean.
There is widespread interest in the nature and role of R&D in developing countries, raising questions on how it should be measured within the guidelin es set out in the Frascati Manual.
A new annex released in 2012 provides an initial attempt to address some of the most salient issues.
The preparation of this annex on how to use OECD guidelines to measure R&D in developing economies was coordinated by the UIS in partnership with the OECD Secretariat under the auspices of the OECD Working Party of National Experts on Science and Technology Indicators (NESTI).
Building on the existing Oslo Manual annex on innovation surveys in developing countries, this new work is a contribution to the OECD Strategy for Development .
26 • The Patent Statistics Manual focuses on factors to be taken into account for optimal use of patent data.
While patents only measure a restri cted share of innovation activi ties, the wide availabi lity of detailed information (e.g.
at regional level) enables i mportant quantitative analyses.
Moreover, the OECD is member of the "Partnership on Measuring ICT for Development" .
The OECD's main contributions to the Partnership include collection and provision of metadata information for OECD countries as part of the global stocktaking exercise, assistance with the development of a common list of ICT indicators, assistance with methodological work associated with the core indicators, contribution to the development of training material for capacity building by providing material (including the OECD Guide to Mea suring the Information Society ) and participation in the development of a global database of ICT indicators, mainly by providing data for OECD countries and for some non -OECD countries.
Further reading • OECD (2011), OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2011: Innovation and Growth in Knowledge Economies , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (forthcoming ), OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2012 , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2002), Frascati Manual: Proposed Standard Practice for Surveys on Research and Experimental Developmen t, OECD Publishing, Paris.
• Eurostat/OECD (2005), Oslo Manual: Proposed Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Technological Innovation Data , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2010), Patent Statistics Manual , OECD Publishing, Paris.
• OECD (2011), OECD Guide to Measuring the Information Society , OECD Publishing, Paris .
27 DSTI databases on innovation and their coverage of developing and emerging economies Main Science and Technology Indicators (MSTI) Database www.oecd.org/sti/msti • Biannual publication showing 76 standard tables on resources on research and experimental development (R&D) as well as researc h and R&D personnel (64 indicators), patents (four indicators), technology balance of payments (three indicators) and international trade i n R&D -intensive industries (five indicators).
• Countries: 33 OECD member countries including Chile and Mexico, plus the following non- member economies: Argentina, China, Romania, the Russian Federation, South Africa and Chinese Taipei .
R&D Database www.oecd.org/sti/rds • Contains the full results of the OECD/Eurostat data collection on R&D expenditure and personnel .
• The database is updated annually and available from 1981 onwards.
It also services as input material for the MSTI and ANBERD Databases.
• Countries: 34 OECD member countries including Chile and Mexico , plus the following non- member economies: Argentina, China, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa and Chinese Taipei .
Research and Development Statistics (Analytical Business Enterprise Research and Development – ANBERD ) www.oecd.org/sti/anberd • Industrial R&D expenditure data for 57 manufacturing and services sectors based on the ISIC Revision 3 classification .
• The database is available in electronic form from 1987 onwards .
• Countries: 32 OECD countries including Chile (the 2011 update covers Mexico ), plus the following non- member economies: China, Romania, Russian Federation, Singapore, South Africa and Chinese Taipei.
Industrial data (Structural Analysis Database – STAN) www.oecd.org/sti/stan • Industry employment, production, investment, trade data for 57 manufacturing and services sectors based on the ISIC Rev.
3 classification for different time periods depending on countries and variables w ith the earliest available for 1970.
• Countries : 32 OECD member countries including Mexico .
Patent Statistics Databases www.oecd.org/sti/ ipr-statistics • The OECD patent database covers data on patent applications to the European Patent Office (EPO), the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), patent applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) that designate the EPO, as well as Triadic Patent families.
• Data mainly derives from the latest version of EPO's Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT).
• Pre-defined sets of indicators include patent counts by county and technology fields, indicators of international co -operation in patents (co-inventions, cross -border ownership of patents).
• Countries: Coverage on applicants and inventors for all countries .
28 DSTI databases on innovation and their coverage of developing and emerging economies (cont'd) Trademark Statistics • Statistics based on four micro- datasets for trademark applications to Europe, France, Germany and the United States mainly from 1998 onwards .
• Countries: Coverage for all applicants .
Key ICT and broadband data www.oecd.org/sti/ ICTindicators • Statistics on : – the communication infra structure and subscribers to mobile, Internet, broad- band, cable TV, household and business access and use of ICTs, – telecommunication and mobile telecommunication services revenue, telecommunication infrastructure investment, ICT value added in business sector value added, R&D expenditure in selected ICT industries, ICT employment in business sector employment, – ICT-related patents as a percentage of national total (PCT filings), share of countries in ICT -related patents filed under the PCT, trade in ICT goods, top 50 t elecommunication and IT firms .
• Broadband statistics covering prices and speeds (e.g.
average advertised download speeds) as well as additional penetration statistics and coverage statistics .
• Countries (for most indicators): 33/34 OECD countries including Chile, Mexico and Turkey , plus the Russian Federation .
STAN Input -Output Database (I -O) www.oecd.org/sti/ inputoutput • Matrices of inter -industrial flows of transactions of goods and services (domestically produced and imported) in current prices across 48 sectors .
• Countries: all OECD countries (except Iceland) and 11 non- member economies: Argentina, Brazil, India, Indonesia, China, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Chinese Taipei, Thailand and Vietnam .
STAN Bilateral Trade (BTD) Database • Data on exports and import values by partner country (or geographical area) and by economic activity based on the ISIC Rev.
• Countries: 70 countries or zones for all OECD countries including Chile , Mexico and Turkey, plus the following non-member economies: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, India, Indonesia, Lithuania, Malaysia, the Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Chinese Taipei and Thailand.
29 DSTI databases on innovation and their coverage of developing and emerging economies (cont'd) Activities of Foreign Affiliates Databases www.oecd.org/sti/ measuring -globalisation • Inward and outward activities of foreign multinationals in manufacturing and services at mainly 2- digit ISIC Rev.
3 level including: – number of establishments, – number of employees, – production/turnover/value- added, – compensation of employees, – R&D expenditures, – number of researchers, – gross fixed capital formation, – intra- firm exports and exports, – infra- firm imports and imports, – gross operating surplus, – technological payments, – technological receipts .
• Countries: 28 OECD countries for manufacturing and 25 OECD countries for services with information on activities of OECD multinationals in emerging and developing countries .
Technology Balance of Payments Database • Provides data on the technology balance of payments receipts , total payments and payments as a percentage of gross domestic expenditure on R&D .
• Countries: 24 OECD member countries including Mexico , plus the following non- member economies: Argentina, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa and Chinese Taipei .
For further infor mation and comments you can contact us at: inno4dev@ oecd.org
