e-ISSN nº 2447-4266 Palmas, v. 7, n. 4, p. 1-24, oct.-dec., 2021 1 Foreword: Dossier Media innovation in Ibero-America: looking to the future Guest editors: Ana Cecília Bisso Nunes (PUCRS, Brazil), Ana Marta Moreira Flores (NOVA, Portugal), Maria Isabel Villa Montoya (EAFIT, Colombia).
Identifying, characterizing and critically reflecting on the innovative processes of communication, media and journalism are central points of this thematic edition of Revista Observatório.
The dossier presents four papers that explore the scenarios in Brazil and Colombia, highlighting innovations in the practical, academic, social and economic fields, where new forms of learning mediated by technologies, the creation of new business models and the transmedia expansion of content, products, or services for multiplatform environments are discussed.
Furthermore, the health crisis emerges as an atypical context and a backdrop for some of the proposed reflections.
In Portrait of media labs: a framework for creating university media labs in Brazil, authored by Maria José Baldessar and Larissa Gaspar Coelho Pinto, it is explored a panoramic view of the environment of innovation and its creation with the media labs within technology sectors, giving special attention to Brazilian university spaces.
From a comprehensive conceptual proposal, the article also presents a creation and practice for these innovative environments.
A perspective on how regional and local journalism can innovate is presented in the paper Innovation And Sustainability In New Economic Journalistic Arrangements In Santa Catarina, by Stefanie Carlan da Silveira, Dairan Mathias Paul and Alessandra Natasha Costa Ramos.
The work exposes a face little documented in academic research, discussing the structures of economic sustainability of digital-born initiatives in the state of Santa Catarina.
It also assesses the existence of innovative elements by investigating 20 cases of digital natives, paying attention to the context of information scarcity in the so-called news deserts.
e-ISSN nº 2447-4266 Palmas, v. 7, n. 4, p. 1-24, oct.-dec., 2021 2 The third article of this dossier is entitled News industry perspectives: an analysis of innovation trends in media management.
It proposes an exploratory taxonomy for the categorization of different types of journalistic ventures in the contemporary scenario, considering their legacy distribution and news production.
The article, authored by Jonas Gonçalves and Francisco Rolfsen Belda, uses a systematic literature review looking for papers and publications connected with the terms "media management" and "journalism innovation".
It also discusses examples from two Brazilian journalistic organizations, A Gazeta and Poder360, to understand the relationships between innovation and management trends identified in the literature and practices in these organizations.
Finally, the work entitled Processes of innovation and technological appropriation in community radio stations: a study of La Cometa and La Esquina radio in Colombia adds a Latin American dimension to the discussion.
The article authored by María Villa analyzes the processes of social appropriation of Information and Communication Technologies in these two organizations from semi-structured interviews and demonstrates their role in optimizing mobility, independence and bringing radio stations closer to their influence communities.
This article discusses the intersection between social empowerment and the use of tools that facilitate more horizontal communication practices.
In the conclusions of this work, it can be seen that the context, which is framed by socioeconomic and political aspects, directly influences the access to technologies by the analyzed community radios.
Innovation will always be a challenge to be studied and is an inexhaustible object of new discoveries, as we can see in the variety of works of this dossier.
This is because innovation is connected to the capacity to generate new products, services or models (Caulier-grice, Mulgan, & Murray, 2010); whether it comes from the educational sector, public or private, linked to communication.
Innovation is also discussed as a set of collective practices related to social change (Domanski et al, 2016).
Still, it is important to recognize that media innovation is also associated with an ability to react to adverse contexts that, through creative processes, generate products, processes, and services that add value to audiences and contribute to their sustainability (García-Avilés et al., 2019) The articles in this issue seek, through literature review, case studies and interviews, to understand the current state of media and journalism innovation in Latin America to establish possible paths for development and evolution.
We wish you all an excellent read!
e-ISSN nº 2447-4266 Palmas, v. 7, n. 4, p. 1-24, oct.-dec., 2021 3 References: Caulier-grice, J., Mulgan, G., & Murray, R. (2010).
The open book of social innovations.
Social innovator series: ways to design, develop and grow social innovations.
The Young Foundation, 30(8), 224.
Domanski, D., Monge, N., Quitiaquez, G., Rocha, D. (Eds).
Innovación social en Latinoamérica.
Bogotá, Corporación Universitaria Minuto de Dios.
Parque Científico de Innovación Social.
A., Carvajal-Prieto, M., Arias, F., & De Lara-González, A.
How journalists innovate in the newsroom.
Proposing a model of the diffusion of innovations in media outlets.
The Journal of Media Innovations, 5(1), 1-16.
