TTeecchhnnoollooggiiccaall rreevvoolluuttiioonnss aanndd tteecchhnnoo-eeccoonnoommiicc ppaarraaddiiggmmss Carlota Perezthe other canon foundation, Norway Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn CONTACT: Rainer Kattel, kattel@staff.ttu.ee; Wolfgang Drechsler, drechsler@staff.ttu.ee; Erik S. Reinert, reinert@staff.ttu.eeWorking Papers in Technology Governance and Economic Dynamics no.
20TECHNOLOGY GOVERNANCE 1 January 2009 1 Technological University of Tallinn, Estonia and Universitites of Cambridge and Sussex, U.K. www.carlotaperez.orgAbstract This paper locates the notion of technological revolutions in the NeoSchumpeterian effort to understand innovation and to identify the regulari-ties, continuities and discontinuities in the process of innovation.
It looks atthe micro- and meso-foundations of the patterns observed in the evolutionof technical change and the interrelations with the context that shape therhythm and direction of innovation.
On this basis, it defines technologicalrevolutions, examines their structure and the role that they play in rejuve-nating the whole economy through the application of the accompanyingtechno-economic paradigm.
This over-arching meta-paradigm or sharedbest practice 'common sense' is in turn defined and analysed in its compo-nents and its impact, including the influence it exercises on institutional andsocial change.
Contents Innovation as the dynamic space for the study of technical change 3 The regularities of technical change: innovation trajectories 4 New technology systems and their interactions 6 Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms 8 The structure of technological revolutions 10 The emergence of a techno-economic paradigm 13 The changes in the cost structure 15The perception of opportunity spaces 16New organisational models 16 Diffusion, resistance and assimilation of successive techno-economic paradigms 19 Putting it together: Regularities, continuities and discontinuities in technical change 20 References 22 2The growing impact of the Information Revolution and the visibly increasing importance of innovation and entrepreneurship has resulted in a resurg-ing interest in Schumpeterian ideas.
Brad De Long suggested in his reviewof McCraw's biography of Schumpeter that the late 20 thand early 21st Century should be as much a Schumpeterian reign as the mid 20th Century was Keynesian.2 Indeed, Schumpeter is among the few modern economists to put technicalchange and entrepreneurship at the root of economic growth.
3Yet, strangely enough, he saw technology as exogenous and –together with institutionsand social organisations– "outside the domain of economic theory" 4.
His focus was the entrepreneur and his goal was to explain the role of innova-tion in economic growth and on the cyclicality of the system.
It is the Neo-Schumpeterians who have endeavoured to analyse technical change and innovation as such, with their regularities and evolution; whohave delved into the characteristics and dynamics of innovation, from indi-vidual technical changes through clusters and systems to technological rev-olutions.
This task has been performed by looking at technology, engineer-ing and business organisation from the perspective of the economist andthe social scientist, identifying the common features in the processes ofevolution, in the interrelations and in the breakthroughs that occur in themost diverse technical areas.
These regularities then inform an understand-ing of the relationship between technical and organisational change,between these and economic performance as well as the mutual relation-ships between technology, the economy and the institutional context.
This paper will concentrate on technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms, their definition, the causal mechanisms that bring themabout, their impact on the economy and institutions and their relevance foreconomic analysis.
Yet, since these macro phenomena are deeply rooted in the micro-foundations of technical change, the following section will refer to some of the basic theoretical advances made at the micro and meso levels.
Innovation as the dynamic space for the study of technical change Schumpeter strongly distinguished innovation , seen as the commercial introduction of a new product or a "new combination", from invention , 32 De Long (2007) 3 Schumpeter (1911 and 1939) In earlier times from Serra (1613) in Renaissance Italy to Friedrich List (1841) in pre-unified Germany, the importance of technology and skills in eco-nomic growth was recognised as obvious.
See Reinert (2007) 4 Schumpeter (1911:1926:1961) p.11which belongs to the realm of science and technology.5Indeed, the space of the technologically possible is much greater than that of the economi-cally profitable and socially acceptable.
It is with profit in mind that entre-preneurs and managers are constantly turning inventions into innovations;technical possibilities and discoveries into economic realities.
In turn,through their investment and funding decisions, they can also steer theresearch effort in particular directions.
Those decision processes are not random.
They are shaped by the context, including relative prices, regulatory and other institutional factors and obvi-ously, their perceived market potential.
They are also path-dependent,because market potential often depends on what the market has alreadyaccepted and because the incorporation of technical change requires thecoming together of several pre-existing explicit and tacit knowledge basesand various sources of practical experience.
Thus, the meaningful space where technical change needs to be studied is that of innovation , at the convergence of technology, the economy and the socio-institutional context.
That space is essentially dynamic and, in it, thebasic concept is that of a trajectory or paradigm , 6which represents the rhythm and the direction of change in a given technology.
The regularities of technical change: innovation trajectories Radical individual innovations are introduced in a relatively primitive versionand, once market acceptance is achieved, they are subjected to a series ofincremental innovations following the changing rhythm of a logistic curve(See figure 1).
Changes occur slowly at first, while producers, designers,distributors and consumers engage in feedback learning processes; rapidlyand intensively once a dominant design 7is established in the market and slowly once again when maturity is reached and Wolf's8law of diminishing returns to investment in innovation sets in.
45 Schumpeter (1911:1926:1961) pp.
See a discussion in Nelson and Winter (1982) pp.
263-6 6 Dosi (1982) 7 Arthur (1988) 8 Wolf (1912)Figure 1.The trajectory of an individual technology Source: Based on Nelson and Winter, Dosi, Metcalfe, Wolf, Utterback and Abernathy, Arthur, etc.
But, together with rhythm, a trajectory also involves directionality within a possibility space.
That is what Dosi emphasized when, with the Kuhnianparallel in mind, 9he introduced the term technical paradigm to represent the tacit agreement of the agents involved as to what is a valid search direc-tion and what will be considered an improvement or a superior version of aproduct, service or technology.
A paradigm is then a collectively sharedlogic at the convergence of technological potential, relative costs, marketacceptance, functional coherence and other factors.
Microprocessors (andthe products based on them) are expected to become faster, smaller, morepowerful, more versatile, relatively cheaper and so on.
By contrast, auto-mobiles and airplanes in the 1950s and 1960s were supposed to becomebigger and bigger and, though they were also expected to be faster, versa-tility was not among the goals.
Thus the notions of trajectory or paradigm highlight the importance of incremental innovations in the growth path following each radical innovation .
Though it is true that major innovations have a central role in determiningnew investment and economic growth, expansion depends on incrementalinnovation 10.
The numerous minor innovations in product enhancement and 59 Kuhn (1962:1970) on scientific paradigms 10 Enos (1962) Degree of maturity and deployment of potential TimeExploratory improvements (design open) Trajectory defined (and dominant design)Maturity Radical innovationTrajectory constrictedClear direction for accelerated improvements and successive modelsDegree of maturity and deployment of potential TimeExploratory improvements (design open) Trajectory defined (and dominant design)Maturity Radical innovationTrajectory constrictedClear direction for accelerated improvements and successive modelsprocess improvement that follow the introduction of any new product have an important impact on productivity increases and market growth.
It hasbeen shown that, some time after the take-off, both the number and theimportance of incremental process innovations tend to overtake productchanges.
11As production volume and productivity become crucial for market expansion, process innovations drive most of the scaling-up investment.
As will be discussed below, what holds for individual technologies in terms of regularities in the dynamism and direction of technical change occursalso at the meso level, in relation to the evolution of all the products in an industry and to that of whole sets of interrelated industries.
Of course these notions and observations represent only the general patterns that characterise the standard dynamics of technical change and thereare multiple deviations and exceptions in specific cases.
New technology systems and their interactions The emergence of individual innovations is not random.
Technologies inter-connect and tend to appear in the neighbourhood of other innovations.
12 Neither does their evolution take place in isolation.
Innovation is a collectiveprocess that increasingly involves other agents of change: suppliers, dis-tributors and many others, including consumers.
The Schumpeterian clustersare the result of techno-economic and social interactions between producers and users within complex dynamic networks.
Furthermore, majorinnovations are inductors of further innovations; they demand complemen-tary ones upstream and downstream and facilitate similar ones, includingcompeting alternatives.
A sufficiently radical innovation such as, for example, television stimulated the emergence of the industries that manufacture receiving and broadcast-ing equipment and of multiple specialized supplier industries.
TV spurred thetransformation of the producing and advertising industries as well as thefilm, music and other creative sectors, plus new maintenance and distribu-tion activities and so on.
This dynamic interrelatedness has led to the notion of a technology system studied by Freeman 13to describe how the Schumpeterian clusters are formed and evolve.
At this meso level of analysis, it is found that the 611 Utterback and Abernathy (1975) 12 Schumpeter (1939) p. 167 13 Freeman (1992) p. 81 and (1994)process of diffusion also follows a logistic shape (as figure 1).
The incremental innovations along the trajectory, rather than simple improvementsare successive new products, services and even whole industries, buildingupon the innovative space inaugurated by the initial radical innovation andwidened by the followers.
Each new technology system not only modifies the business space but also the institutional context and even the culture (as disposable plastics did inthe past and Internet does now).
New rules and regulations are likely to berequired, as well as specialized training and other institutional facilitators(sometimes replacing the established ones).
These have in turn strong feed-back shaping effects upon the technologies.
Maturity will be reached when the innovative possibilities of the whole system begin to wane and the corresponding markets to saturate.
Thus, indi-vidual technologies are not introduced in isolation.
They enter into a chang-ing context that strongly influences their potential and is already shaped bythe previous innovations in the system.
A new product appearing in the early phase of a new system has a more dynamic market life ahead than one introduced at its maturity phase.
Thishappens for two main reasons.
One is the exhaustion of the opportunityspace of that particular system, so that the last innovations are likely to bevery minor.
For example, the long series of home electrical appliances in theearly 20 thCentury began with the refrigerator and the washing machine and petered out with the electric can-opener and the electric carving knife.
Theother reason for decreasing market dynamism is the intense learning thatoccurs within the system and the externalities that result from it.
Thesetend to reduce the time to market and to ease user acceptance thus short-ening the product life-cycle and cutting down the time for profitability.
Forinstance, it took 24 years, from 1954, to incorporate air conditioning as animprovement in 90% of the automobiles produced in the US, whereas radi-al tyres, introduced in 1970, took less than 8 years to reach 90% of themarket.
14 The complex and changing network of interactions and cooperation amongthe many agents that contribute to innovations –researchers, engineers,suppliers, producers, users and institutions– as a technology systemevolves has been conceptualized as a national system of innovation 15 evoking Friedrich List's national system of political economy16.
This has natural714 Cited by Grübler (1990) p. 155 15 Freeman (1987 and 1995), Lundvall (1988) 16 List (1841)ly led other researchers to the study of regional and sectoral systems of innovation .17The interrelatedness of technologies and of the knowledge and experience bases that underlie their development, together with theinfrastructures and service networks that complement them and the multi-ple learning processes that accompany them, provide externalities for allparticipants and advantages for the society in which they are embedded.
Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms Just as individual innovations are interconnected in technology systems,these are in turn interconnected in technological revolutions.
Thus, on a firstapproximation a technological revolution (TR) can be defined as a set of interrelated radical breakthroughs, forming a major constellation of interde-pendent technologies; a cluster of clusters or a system of systems.
The current information technology revolution, for example, opened a first technology system around microprocessors (and other integrated semi-con-ductors), their specialized suppliers and their initial uses in calculators,games, civil and military miniaturizing and digitalizing of control instrumentsand others.
After that there was an overlapping sequence of minicomput-ers and personal computers, software, telecoms and Internet that haveeach opened new systems trajectories, while being strongly inter-relatedand inter-dependent.
As they appeared, these systems interconnected andcontinued expanding together with intense feedback loops in both tech-nologies and markets.
A similar stylized description can be made of each of the previous constellations.
Five such meta-systems can be identified since the initial "Industrial Revolution" in England.
Each can be seen as inaugurated by an importanttechnological breakthrough acting as the big-bang that opens a new universe of opportunity for profitable innovation.
Such was the case of theIntel microprocessor, or computer on a chip, initiating the information rev-olution.
Table 1 indicates the five revolutions, their corresponding big-bangsand the core country where the revolution originally takes shape and fromwhich it spreads across the world (sometimes even concentrated in a par-ticular region: Manchester was as much the cradle and the symbol of theAge of Steam as Silicon Valley has been for the microelectronics revolution) 817 Malerba (2002); Arocena and Sutz (2000); Howells (1999)9Table 1.
Five successive technological revolutions, 1770s to 2000s Source: Perez (2002) What distinguishes a TR from a random collection of technology systems and justifies conceptualizing it as a revolution are two basic features.
The first is the most visible and defines what is popularly understood as "the revolution"; but it is the second that makes it really warrant the term.That capacity to transform other industries and activities results from theinfluence of its associated techno-economic paradigm 18, a best practice model for the most effective use of the new technologies within andbeyond the new industries.
The new industries of the revolution expand tobecome the engines of growth, for a long period while the techno-econom-ic paradigm drives a vast reorganisation and a widespread rise in produc-tivity across the economy.
Thus, a technological revolution can more generally be defined as a major upheaval of the wealth-creating potential of the economy, opening a vastinnovation opportunity space and providing a new set of associated generictechnologies, infrastructures and organisational principles that can signifi-cantly increase the efficiency and effectiveness of all industries and activities.
1971 The Intel microprocessor is announced in Santa Clara, CaliforniaUSA (spreading to Europe and Asia)Age of Information and TelecommunicationsFIFTH1908 First Model -T comes out of the Ford plant in Detroit, MichiganUSA (with Germany at first vying for world leadership), later spreading to EuropeAge of Oil, the Automobile and Mass ProductionFOURTH1875 The Carnegie Bessemer steel plant opens in Pittsburgh, PennsylvaniaUSA and Germany forging ahead and overtaking BritainAge of Steel, Electricity and Heavy EngineeringTHIRD1829 Test of the 'Rocket' steam engine for the Liverpool -Manchester railwayBritain (spreading to Continent and USA)Age of Steam and Railways SECOND1771 Arkwright 's mill opens in Cromford Britain The 'Industrial Revolution 'FIRSTYear Big-bang initiating the revolution Core country or countries Popular name for the periodTechnologica l revolution 1971 The Intel microprocessor is announced in Santa Clara, CaliforniaUSA (spreading to Europe and Asia)Age of Information and TelecommunicationsFIFTH1908 First Model -T comes out of the Ford plant in Detroit, MichiganUSA (with Germany at first vying for world leadership), later spreading to EuropeAge of Oil, the Automobile and Mass ProductionFOURTH1875 The Carnegie Bessemer steel plant opens in Pittsburgh, PennsylvaniaUSA and Germany forging ahead and overtaking BritainAge of Steel, Electricity and Heavy EngineeringTHIRD1829 Test of the 'Rocket' steam engine for the Liverpool -Manchester railwayBritain (spreading to Continent and USA)Age of Steam and Railways SECOND1771 Arkwright 's mill opens in Cromford Britain The 'Industrial Revolution 'FIRSTYear Big-bang initiating the revolution Core country or countries Popular name for the periodTechnologica l revolution 18 The term was introduced by Perez (1984) –replacing the previous (1983) technological style– in order to connect with Dosi's (1982) concept of technical paradigms 1.
The strong interconnectedness and interdependence of the participating systems in their technologies and markets.
The capacity to transform profoundly the rest of the economy (and eventually society).The processes of diffusion of each technological revolution and its technoeconomic paradigm –together with their assimilation by the economy andsociety as well as the resulting increases in productivity and expansion–constitute successive great surges of development .
19 It should be noted that this concept represents a break with both Kondratiev's and Schumpeter's notion of long waves .20For them, the focus is on the upswings and downswings in economic growth.
AlthoughSchumpeter clearly ascribes such waves to technological revolutions whileKondratiev does not commit himself to any particular causal factor, they areboth trying to explain long-term variations in GDP and other economicaggregates.
The author has suggested focusing instead on explaining theprocess of diffusion of each technological revolution and on its transforma-tive effects on all aspects of the economy and society, including amongthem the impact on rhythms of economic growth.
This has resulted on dif-ferent dating of the surges (as opposed to those of the traditional longwaves) and on identifying a different set of regularities in the patterns ofdiffusion which are the object of the discussion that follows.
21 The structure of technological revolutions The interconnection of the technologies of a revolution takes place at sev-eral levels.
20-21 20 Schumpeter (1939), Kondratiev (1935).
For a selection of the main authors (both from evolutionary economics and from other schools of thought) see Freeman ed.
(1996) and for themore statistical treatment of the same Louca and Reijnders eds.
(1999) 21 For a critique of the use of the term long waves in economic growth and an explanation of the switch to using great surges of development see Perez (2002), Ch.
d. e.They stem from the same areas of knowledge in science and technology and use similar engineering principles.
They require similar skills for design and operation –quite often new ones.
They stimulate the upstream development of a common network of suppliers of inputs and services as well as interdependent distribu-tion outlets.
Their dynamism is mutually driven through very strong interlinkages, often being the main market for each other (the more growth andinnovation there is in computers, the more growth and innovationthere will be in semiconductors and vice versa).
Their diffusion generates coherent patterns of consumption and useA technological revolution basically introduces whole new sections in the input output table which gradually become the most dynamic (and end upmodifying the rest).
In terms of structure, each revolution includes a significant number of interrelated new products and production technologies, giving rise to importantnew industries.
Among them there tends to be a core all-pervasive low-costinput, often a source of energy, sometimes a crucial material, plus one ormore new infrastructures.
The latter usually change the frontier and condi-tions of transportation networks –for products, people, energy and infor-mation– extending their reach and increasing their speed and reliabilitywhile drastically reducing their cost.
Table 2 indicates the main industries and infrastructures of each of the five technological revolutions that took place since the "Industrial Revolution" atthe end of the 18 thCenturyso that the learning in one system facilitates the learning in the next and the installation of conditions for the use of one set of productsbecomes an externality for the next (once electricity comes to thehome for lighting and refrigeration, it facilitates the adoption ofradios and vacuum cleaners).
Five Technological Revolutions: Main industries and infrastructures Note:* These traditional industries acquire a new role and a new dynamism when serving as the material and the fuel of the world of railways and machinerySource: Based on Perez (2002) p. 14 12Technological revolution FIRST: The 'IndustrialRevolution' SECOND: Age of Steam andRailways THIRD: Age of Steel,Electricity andHeavy Engineering FOURTH: Age of Oil, theAutomobile andMass Production FIFTH: Age of Informationand Telecommuni-cations2.
New technologies and new or redefined industries Mechanized cotton industry Wrought ironMachinery Steam engines and machinery (made in iron; fueled by coal)Iron and coal mining (now playinga central role in growth)*Railway constructionRolling stock productionSteam power for manyindustries(including textiles) Cheap steel (especially Bessemer) Full development of steam enginefor steel shipsHeavy chemistry and civil engi-neeringElectrical equipment industryCopper and cablesCanned and bottled foodPaper and packaging Mass-produced automobiles Cheap oil and oil fuelsPetrochemicals (synthetics)Internal combustion engine forautomobiles, transport, tractors,airplanes, war tanks and electricityHome electrical appliancesRefrigerated and frozen foods The information revolution: Cheap microelectronics.Computers, softwareTelecommunicationsControl instrumentsComputer-aided biotechnology andnew materials 3.
New or redefined infrastructures Canals and waterways Turnpike roadsWater power (highly improved waterwheels) Railways (Use of steam engine) Universal postal serviceTelegraph (mainly nationally alongrailway lines)Great ports, great depots and world-wide sailing shipsCity gas Worldwide shipping in rapid steel steamships (use of Suez Canal)Transcontinental railways (use ofcheap steel rails and bolts in stan-dard sizes).Great bridges and tunnelsWorldwide Telegraph Telephone (mainly nationally)Electrical networks (for illuminationand industrial use) Networks of roads, highways, ports and airports Networks of oil ductsUniversal electricity (industry andhomes)Worldwide analog telecommunica-tions (telephone, telex and cable-gram) wire and wireless World digital telecommunications (cable, fiber optics, radio and satel-lite) Internet/ Electronic mail and other e-servicesMultiple source, flexible use, elec-tricity networksHigh-speed multi-modal physicaltransport links (by land, air andwater) From the point of view of the role they play in driving change, the core industries of each revolution can be ranged into three main categories:22 A fourth category of induced branches may be added to encompass a set of industries that are not necessarily revolutionary in technological termsbut that may be seen as indispensable to facilitate the maximum diffusionof the core industries.
They may have existed before but they are mod-ernised and take on a different role.
Such was the case of the constructionindustry that made suburbanization possible during the mass productionsurge.
The multiplication of housing at the edges of cities constantlyexpanded the market for automobiles and electrical appliances and createda whole technology system of standardised building materials and severalother suppliers of goods and services for suburban construction and living.In the current world of globalised trade and internet shopping, a similar roleis being played by the courier services –and all the other systems of trans-port of goods– that have experienced explosive growth and profound trans-formations to facilitate complex global and local logistics.
The emergence of a techno-economic paradigm No matter how important and dynamic a set of new technologies may be,it only merits the term revolution if it has the power to bring about a transformation across the board.
It is the techno-economic paradigm (TEP), 131.
The motive branches which produce the cheap inputs with pervasive applicability: Semiconductors today, oil and plastics in the previoussurge, cheap steel in the third, coal in the second and water wheelsin the first.
23 The carrier branches which are the most visible and active users of the inputs and represent the paradigmatic products of the revolution,carrying the "word" about the new opportunities: Computers, soft-ware and mobile phones today, automobiles and electrical appliancesin the fourth, steel steam ships in the third, iron steam engines in thesecond and textile machinery in the first.
The infrastructures which are part of the revolution in terms of technology and whose impact is felt in shaping and extending the mar-ket boundaries for all industries: Internet today, roads and electrici-ty in the fourth, the world transport network in the third (transcon-tinental railways and steamship routes and ports), national railwaysin the second and canals in the first.
22 Perez (1983 and 1984) 23 For a discussion of the role of water wheels in the industrial revolution, see Tylecote (1992)14evolving as the new technologies diffuse, that multiplies their impact across the economy and eventually also modifies the socio-institutional structures.
Such a meta-paradigm24is the set of the most successful and profitable practices in terms of choice of inputs, methods and technologies and interms of organisational structures, business models and strategies.
Thosemutually compatible principles and criteria develop in the process of usingthe new technologies, overcoming obstacles and finding more adequateprocedures, routines and structures.
The emerging heuristic routines andapproaches are gradually internalized by engineers and managers, investorsand bankers, sales and advertising people, entrepreneurs and consumers.
Intime, a shared logic is established; a new "common sense" is accepted forinvestment decisions as well as for consumer choice.
The old ideas areunlearned and the new ones become "normal".
The extraordinarily efficient pyramidal structures with clearly defined roles and tasks that handled growth and innovation in the mass production par-adigm of the 1950s are seen as bureaucratic dinosaurs next to the dynam-ic global networks digitally interconnected with multi-skilled personnel andhigh levels of autonomy of the flexible production paradigm of the currentInformation Technology revolution.
The marvel of the cabled telephone fortalking at a distance becomes a museum piece when consumers can nor-mally expect wireless multipurpose devices for all communication, informa-tion and entertainment needs.
The construction of a techno-economic paradigm occurs simultaneously in three main areas of practice and perception: 24 To avoid unpleasant repetitiveness, TEPand meta-paradigm will be used as synonyms of techno-economic paradigm .1.
In the dynamics of the relative cost structure of inputs to production where new low- and decreasing-cost elements appear and becomethe most attractive choice for profitable innovation and investment In the perceived spaces for innovation , where the entrepreneurial opportunities are increasingly mapped for the further development ofthe new technologies or for using them advantageously in the exist-ing sectors, and In the organisational criteria and principles , where practice keeps showing the superior performance of particular methods and struc-tures when it comes to taking advantage of the power of the newtechnologies for maximum efficiency and profits.On all three areas, the emergence of the paradigm is a function of the rhythm of diffusion of the revolutionary products, technologies and infra-structures.
At first the impact is localized and minor, with time it is wide-spread and all-encompassing.
The changes occur in the economy and in theterritory, in behaviours and in ideas.
The paradigm and its new commonsense criteria become ingrained and act as inductors and filters for the pur-suit of technical, organisational and strategic innovations as well as for busi-ness and consumer decisions.
The process is self-reinforced as the furtherpropagation and adoption of the new technologies confirm in practice thewisdom of the shared principles The changes in the cost structure The new dynamics introduced in the relative cost structure is an importantdriver of the emergence of the new techno-economic paradigm (TEP).
Infact, a crucial element in the articulation of a revolutionary constellation isthe appearance of a key input 25that is (i) obviously cheap and getting cheaper, (ii) inexhaustible in the foreseeable future, (iii) all-pervasive in itsapplications and (iv) capable of increasing the power and decreasing thecost of capital and labour.
26 Such was cheap water power for the mills and canals in the first revolution;cheap coal for the steam powered railways and mills of the second; cheapsteel for the worldwide steamships, railways, the giant bridges and struc-tures and the major chemical and electrical equipment of the third; cheapoil for the internal combustion engines of automobiles, trucks, airplanes andships as well as for the production of electricity and, finally, cheap micro-processors for the computers and telecom equipment of the current fifth.
The general price profile is also radically modified by the growing cost advantage of the new infrastructure.
This happens in two main ways:directly through decreasing prices (as operational volume decreases the unitcost of transport) and indirectly through increasing the market reach ofusers and therefore allowing greater economies of scale in production anddistribution.
So the preferred direction of innovation is already suggested bythe relative cost profile of inputs and transport, which become a part of themeta-paradigm.
Wedgwood pottery could not go far without breaking on the backs of mules along uneven turnpike roads; it could reach the world going from river tocanal and from canal to river and on to the wide seas.
1525 Originally termed "key factor" in Perez (1983, 1984 and 1985) 26 Perez (1984)The perception of opportunity spaces The second way in which the meta-paradigm signals the best direction for investment and innovation is by the perception of the profitable opportuni-ty spaces.
These are ever more clearly defined as the new technologiespropagate and multiply.
Such spaces are of two main types: those of theproducers of the new technologies and those of the users.
At the core of the revolution are the basic scientific and engineering principles that opened the whole new universe of possibilities.
The dynamism ofinnovation in those opportunity spaces is internally driven and the con-tributing industries are mutually-reinforced.
However, their evolution is con-stantly creating new spaces for innovation in the rest of the economy dueto the generic technologies of ample applicability that each revolution pro-vides.
The new infrastructures are the most obvious all-pervasive generictechnologies; the others are the new sorts of materials and equipment thatpenetrate the operational context of every other industry.
In terms of infrastructures, the current role of Internet in the major reshaping of structures and behaviours in finance and trade needs no reminder.
Inthe fourth surge, the networks of roads and electricity to the home madewidespread suburban living possible.
Equipment such as the steam engine, in the second, liberated industry from the need to be near a source of water power.
The individual electric motor,in the third, allowed industry to do away with the forest of belts and thesimultaneous operation of all machines; it also allowed small scale poweredindustry.
In materials, the molecular " lego" trajectory of innovation in the petrochemical technology system opened a wider and wider range of applicationopportunities across the economy, from successive plastics for packagingor structures, through textile fibres and fertilizers to detergents and phar-maceuticals during the fourth surge.
New organisational models Finally, the meta-paradigm incorporates the criteria for best organisationalpractice.
As the new technologies transform work and consumption pat-terns, they also transform the way work and businesses are organised.Regular practice in the use of these technologies and in relating to the newconditions in the market contributes to the establishment of new principlesof organisation that prove superior to the previous and become part of thenew common sense for efficiency and effectiveness.
16The penny post, telegraph and national railways in the second surge changed, for instance, the structure of the banking industry from isolatedlocal institutions to national networks of local branches.
The railways them-selves became very large business structures requiring what were then themost advanced organisational and logistics innovations for the managementof complex systems.
Following Ford's example, the assembly line with Taylorist principles generalised in the fourth surge and deeply transformed the organization of fab-ricated products.
The clear separation between blue and white collar work-ers, between the thinking and the executing, had consequences that wentfar beyond the factory.
And so did the much greater productivity achievedwith that organization.
Ford's reduction of the work force and more thandoubling the average wage together with his claim that cars would becheap enough for his workers to buy were a foretaste of the social trans-formation to come.
In each case, the change in organisational and business logic becomes wide ranging and modifies business models and strategies so that the ones thatare more compatible with the general logic of the paradigm prove to bemore successful, become highly visible and are increasingly imitated.
Thusthe TEP is further enriched and the process is self-reinforced.
Table 3 gives a few of the most salient and general innovation principles that have characterized each of the successive techno-economic para-digms.
27 1727 By the fourth surge, the transmission of the full model with all its principles and practices had become the professional activity of hundreds of consultants in Scientific Management(Taylorism).
In the current surge it has blossomed into a full-fledged economic sector and hasbeen transforming deeply the contents of the MBA courses developed under the previous para-digm.Table 3.
The five great surges of development and their techno-economic paradigms Source: Based on Perez (2002) p. 18 A techno-economic paradigm is then the result of a complex collective learning process articulated in a dynamic mental model of the best eco-nomic, technological and organisational practice for the period in which aspecific technological revolution is being adopted and assimilated by theeconomic and social system.
Each TEP combines shared perceptions,shared practices and shared directions of change.
Its adoption facilitates theachievement of the maximum efficiency and profitability and its diffusionprovides a common understanding among the different agents that partici-pate in the economy, from producers to consumers.
18Information-intensity (microelectronics -based ICT) Decentralised integration/ network structures Knowledge as capital / intangible value added Heterogeneity, diversity, adaptability Segmentation of markets/ prol iferati on of niches Economies of scope and specialisation combined with scale Globalisation/ interaction between the global and the local Inward and outward cooperation/ clusters Instant contact and action / instant global communicationsFIFTH: From 1971 Age of Information and TelecommunicationsIn USA, spreading to Europe and AsiaMass production/mass markets Economies of scale (product and market volume)/ horizontal integration Standardisation of products Energy intensi ty (oi l based) Synthetic materials Functional specialisation/ hierarchical pyramidsCentralisation/ metropolitan centres –suburbanisation National powers, world agreements and confrontationsFO URTH: Fro m 19 08 Age of Oil, the Automobile and Mass Production In USA and spreading to EuropeGiant structures (steel) Economies of scale of plant/ vertical integration Distributed power for industry (electricity)Science as a productive force Worldwide networks and empires (including cartels) Universal standardisation Cost accounting for control and efficiency Great sc al e for world mark et pow er/ ' small' i s suc cess ful, if local THIRD: From 1875 Age of Steel, Electricity and Heavy EngineeringUSA and Germany overtaking BritainEconomies of agglomeration/ Industrial cities/ National markets Power centres with national networks Scale as progressStandard parts/ machine -made machines Energy where needed (steam) Interdependent movement (of machines and of means of transport)SECOND: From 1829 Age of Steam and Railways In Britain and spreading to C ontinent and U SAFactory production Mechanization Productivity/ time keeping and time savingFluidity of movement (as ideal for machines with water -power and for transport through canals and other waterways) Local networksFI RS T: Fro m 1 771 The 'Industrial Revolution ' BritainTechno-economic paradigm 'Common-sense' innovation principlesGreat surge of development Core country Information-intensity (microelectronics -based ICT)Decentralised integration/ network structures Knowledge as capital / intangible value added Heterogeneity, diversity, adaptability Segmentation of markets/ prol iferati on of niches Economies of scope and specialisation combined with scale Globalisation/ interaction between the global and the local Inward and outward cooperation/ clusters Instant contact and action / instant global communicationsFIFTH: From 1971 Age of Information and TelecommunicationsIn USA, spreading to Europe and AsiaMass production/mass markets Economies of scale (product and market volume)/ horizontal integration Standardisation of products Energy intensi ty (oi l based) Synthetic materials Functional specialisation/ hierarchical pyramidsCentralisation/ metropolitan centres –suburbanisation National powers, world agreements and confrontationsFO URTH: Fro m 19 08 Age of Oil, the Automobile and Mass Production In USA and spreading to EuropeGiant structures (steel) Economies of scale of plant/ vertical integration Distributed power for industry (electricity)Science as a productive force Worldwide networks and empires (including cartels) Universal standardisation Cost accounting for control and efficiency Great sc al e for world mark et pow er/ ' small' i s suc cess ful, if local THIRD: From 1875 Age of Steel, Electricity and Heavy EngineeringUSA and Germany overtaking BritainEconomies of agglomeration/ Industrial cities/ National markets Power centres with national networks Scale as progressStandard parts/ machine -made machines Energy where needed (steam) Interdependent movement (of machines and of means of transport)SECOND: From 1829 Age of Steam and Railways In Britain and spreading to C ontinent and U SAFactory production Mechanization Productivity/ time keeping and time savingFluidity of movement (as ideal for machines with water -power and for transport through canals and other waterways) Local networksFI RS T: Fro m 1 771 The 'Industrial Revolution ' BritainTechno-economic paradigm 'Common-sense' innovation principlesGreat surge of development Core country 19Diffusion, resistance and assimilation of successive techno-economic paradigms It is to be noted that some of the principles indicated in table 3 extend beyond the economy into the social and institutional.
Suburbanisation –list-ed in the fourth– and globalisation –in the fifth– are two such instances.
In fact, the common sense principles of organisation for maximum efficiency and effectiveness embodied in the techno-economic paradigm graduallyspread out of the business world and into government and other non profitinstitutions.
The operations manuals and hierarchical structures of govern-ment ministries in the 1960s were fundamentally similar to those of a bigmass production corporation.
Yet, at present, these two sorts of institutionsare very different.
The changes that have been occurring in company struc-tures and organisations since the irruption of the information revolution inthe 1970s have radically changed them into what are now the flexible net-worked (increasingly global) corporations.
But the processes of incorporat-ing those more effective patterns into public institutions have been slow andare far from fully developed.
Organisational inertia isa well known phenomenon of human and social resistance to change.
In themarket economy, however, inertia is overcome by competition, which byshowing the direction of success serves as a guide to best practice and asa survival threat to the laggards.
That type of pressure and directionality isnot present in most public institutions.
Historically, then, these have laggedconsiderably (typically as much as twenty to thirty years) and have only imi-tated the paradigmatic principles developed in firms when forced to respondto political pressures for effectiveness.
Even in the economy, under the pressure of competition, the profound and wide-ranging changes made possible by each technological revolution andits techno-economic paradigm are not easily assimilated; they give rise tointense resistance and require bringing forth even stronger change-inducingmechanisms.
Eventually, the new TEP becomes the shared, established and unquestioned 'common sense' both in the economy and in the socio-institutional frame-work creating a clearly biased context in favour of the trajectories of thetechnologies of the revolution and their use across the economy.
This adap-tation generates externalities that operate as an inclusion-exclusion mecha-nism to encourage compatible innovations and discourage incompatibleones.
This is an important part of the explanation of why change occurs byrevolutions.
Thus, techno-economic paradigms act as context shapers infavour of one revolution and –through over-adaptation– as hindrance andobstacle for the next.20Hence, each great surge of development involves a turbulent process of diffusion and assimilation.
The major incumbent industries are replaced asengines of growth by new emerging ones; the established technologies andthe prevailing paradigm are made obsolete and transformed by the newones; many of the working and management skills that had been success-ful in the past become outdated and inefficient demanding unlearning, learn-ing and relearning processes.
Such changes in the economy are very dis-turbing of the social status-quo and have each time accompanied the explo-sive growth of new wealth with strong polarising trends in the income dis-tribution.
These and other imbalances and tensions, including a major finan-cial bubble and its collapse, result from the technological upheaval and endup creating conditions that require an equally deep transformation of thewhole institutional framework.
It is only when this is achieved and theenabling context is in place that the full wealth creating potential of eachrevolution can be deployed.
28 Putting it together: Regularities, continuities and discontinuities in technical change Within the neo-Schumpeterian lines of inquiry, innovation occupies an important space, including its dynamics, its clustering and interrelations.Studies of innovation have shown that the introduction of technical changeis not random but path dependent and interdependent with other innova-tions clustered in systems, which are in turn interconnected in revolutions.
Although innovation is constant in the market economy, it is not always continuous.
There are changes in rhythm that tend to follow a logistic curveand are influenced by the cycle of the technology system in which they areembedded.
There are discontinuities often stimulated by the exhaustion ofpossibilities along a particular trajectory, where productivity and marketsare approaching exhaustion.
The technology systems , grouped in a technological revolution, overlap and generate externalities and markets for each other, thus influencing thedirection of further innovation.
Technological revolutions are clusters of interrelated technology systems that only merit the term 'revolution' because they extend far beyond theboundaries of the new industries they introduce.
Such surges of changeeventually transform the rest of the economy, elevate the expected level of 28 See Perez (2002) for an extended discussion of the processes of diffusion and assimilation of technological revolutions and TEPs as well as for the crucial role of the two complementaryagents of innovation and growth -financial and production capital.21productivity across the board, rejuvenate mature industries and open new innovation trajectories, not only within the new technologies, but alsothrough their application to rejuvenate all the other industries and activities.
The vehicle of this wide-ranging transformation is the techno-economic paradigm , which is a best practice model gradually emerging from practice in order to make optimal use of the new innovative potential offered by eachrevolution.
Each techno-economic paradigm serves as an envelope encom-passing and shaping the trajectories of individual technologies.
Its influenceextends from the business sphere to institutions and society so that as theadoption of the new TEP advances along the diffusion curve of each tech-nological revolution (or along each great surge of development ), it gradually becomes the shared common sense for decision making in management,engineering, finance and trade.
This new logic and its capacity to increaseeffectiveness and efficiency eventually also shape institutional and socialorganisations, expectations and behaviour.
This mutual adaptation of technology and society through the meta-paradigm enables reaping the maximum benefit from the wealth creating poten-tial brought by each great surge.
But, when this potential is exhausted anda new revolution begins to take shape, it acts as a powerful inertial force.
This understanding of the influence of technical change on long term economic growth is one of the key contributions of evolutionary economics tothe understanding of macroeconomics as dynamic and historically shaped.It is no longer possible to ignore the technological revolution being diffusedand its stage of deployment.
The level of abstraction at which growth processes are studied need not –and indeed should not– ignore the nature of the specific technologiesbeing propagated.
Neither suburbanization nor globalization would havebeen possible without mass production and the switch to the automobile asmeans of transport in the former or without transoceanic fibre optics, satel-lites and internet in the latter.
The concepts of long run equilibrium and continuous progress are profoundly questioned in favour of more complex processes of overcoming dis-equilibria originated in massive innovation, in internal differentiation withinand between sectors, of creative destruction, assimilation, learning andunlearning successive technological spaces and best practice models and ofreaching and overcoming maturity through successive surges of change.The changing rhythms of growth and the processes of structural changeand productivity increase in the economy can now be understood as driv-en by technical change and as shaped by the diffusion of successive tech-nological revolutions.22Taken together, the micro, meso and macro view of how technologies evolve shows that it is possible to recognize the nature of technology, itsforms of evolution and its interrelations as an object for social scienceanalysis and as a way of embedding economic theory in the dynamics ofits interaction with technology and institutions in a changing historical con-text.
Ignoring the potent role and influence of technical and institutional change in shaping the economy reduces the analytic capacity of economics.Incorporating them in a historically dynamic approach is an important taskin order to enhance the explanatory and predictive power of economic sci-ence.
Evolutionary economists and neo-Schumpeterians have pioneered inexploring and mapping that new territory.
References Arthur, W. Brian (1988), 'Competing Technologies: An Overview', in Dosi et al.
590–607 Arocena, Rodrigo and Judith Sutz (2000) "Looking at national systems of innovation from the South", Industry and Innovation , Vol.
55-75 De Long, J. Bradford (2007) 'Creative Destruction's Reconstruction: Joseph Schumpeter Revisited', The Chronicle of Higher Education , December 7 Dosi, Giovanni (1982), 'Technical Paradigms and Technological Trajectories: A Suggested Interpretation of the Determinants of Technical Change', Research Policy , Vol.
147–62 Dosi, Giovanni, Christopher Freeman, Richard Nelson, Gerald Silverberg and Luc Soete (eds.)
(1988) Technical Change and Economic Theory , London and New York: Columbia University Press and Pinter Enos, J.L.
(1962) "Invention and innovation in the petroleum refining industry" in NBER The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity , Princeton: Princeton University Press Freeman, Christopher (1974), The Economics of Industrial Innovation , Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books- (1987), Technology Policy and Economic Performance: Lessons from Japan , London: Pinter - (1992), The Economics of Hope , London: Pinter - (1996) Long Wave Theory, ILCWE No.
69, Cheltenham: Elgar23Grübler, Arnulf (1990) The Rise and Fall of Infrastructures , Heidelberg and new York: Physica-Verlag Kondratiev, Nikolai D. (1935) 'The Long Waves in Economic Life', Review of Economic Statistics , No.
105-15 Kuhn, Thomas (1962:1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , (2nd edition, enlarged), Chicago: University of Chicago Press Louca, Francisco and Jan Reijnders (eds.)
(1999) The Foundations of Long Wave Theory: Models and methodology, ILCWE No.
Lundvall, Bengt Ake (1988), "Innovation as an interactive process: from user-producer interaction to the national system of innovation", Ch.
Nelson Richard and Sydney Winter (1977) 'In search of a useful theory of innovation' in Research Policy , Malerba, Franco (2002) "Sectoral systems of innovation and production", Research Policy , Vol 31, No.
247-64 List, Frederick (1841), The National System of Political Economy , English edition 1904, London: Longman Metcalfe, Stanley J.
(2001) 'Restless capitalism: increasing returns and growth in enterprise economies,' in Industrial Structure and Innovation Dynamics , Edward Elgar Perez, Carlota (1983), 'Structural Change and the Assimilation of New Technologies in the Economic and Social Systems', Futures , Vol.
357–75- (1984), ""Las Nuevas Tecnologías: Una Visión de Conjunto" (1986), in C. Ominami ed., La Tercera Revolución Industrial: Impactos Internacionales del Actual Viraje Tecnológico , Grupo Editor Latinoamericano, Buenos Aires, 1986, pp.
English version: The New Technologies: An Integrated View, The Other Canon andTallinn University of Technology Working Papers in TechnologyGovernance and Economic Dynamics, 19.
- (1985), 'Microelectronics, Long Waves and World Structural Change: New Perspectives for Developing Countries', World Development , Vol.
441-463 - (2002) Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: the Dynamics of Bubbles and Golden Ages , Cheltenham: Elgar - (2007) "Finance and technical change: a long-term view" in Hanusch, Horst and Andreas Pyka (eds.)
Elgar companion to NeoSchumpeterian Economics , Cheltenham: Elgar, Ch.
775-99 Tylecote, Andrew (1992) The Long Wave in the World Economy , London: Routledge Utterback, James M. and William J Abernathy.
(1975), 'A Dynamic Model of Process and Product Innovation,' Omega , Vol.
6395624Reinert, Erik (2007) How Rich Countries Got Rich… and Why Poor Countries Stay Poor , New York: Carroll and Graf Schumpeter, Joseph A.
(1911:1961) The theory of Economic Development , New York: Oxford University Press (1939:1982), Business Cycles , 2 vols., Philadelphia: Porcupine Press Serra, Antonio (1613) Breve trattato delle cause che possono far abbondare li regni d'oro e d'argento dove non sono miniere , Naples: Lazzaro Scorrigio Wolf, J.
(1912), Die Volkswirtschaft der Gegenwart und Zukunft, Leipzig: A. Deichert25Working Papers in Technology Governance and Economic Dynamics The Other Canon Foundation, Norway, and the Technology Governance program at Tallinn University of Technology (TUT), Estonia, have launcheda new working papers series, entitled "Working Papers in TechnologyGovernance and Economic Dynamics".
In the context denoted by the titleseries, it will publish original research papers, both practical and theoretical,both narrative and analytical, in the area denoted by such concepts asuneven economic growth, techno-economic paradigms, the history and the-ory of economic policy, innovation strategies, and the public managementof innovation, but also generally in the wider fields of industrial policy,development, technology, institutions, finance, public policy, and econom-ic and financial history and theory.
The idea is to offer a venue for quickly presenting interesting papers – scholarly articles, especially as preprints, lectures, essays in a form thatmay be developed further later on – in a high-quality, nicely formatted ver-sion, free of charge: all working papers are downloadable for free from as soon as they appear, and you may also order a freesubscription by e-mail attachment directly from the same website.
The first nine working papers are already available from the website.
Erik S. Reinert, Evolutionary Economics, Classical Development Economics, and the History of Economic Policy: A Plea forTheorizing by Inclusion.Richard R. Nelson, Economic Development from the Perspective of Evolutionary Economic Theory.Erik S. Reinert, Development and Social Goals: Balancing Aid and Development to Prevent 'Welfare Colonialism'.Jan Kregel and Leonardo Burlamaqui, Finance, Competition, Instability, and Development Microfoundations and FinancialScaffolding of the Economy.Erik S. Reinert, European Integration, Innovations and Uneven Economic Growth: Challenges and Problems of EU 2005.Leonardo Burlamaqui, How Should Competition Policies and Intellectual Property Issues Interact in a Globalised World?A Schumpeterian PerspectivePaolo Crestanello and Giuseppe Tattara, Connections and Competences in the Governance of the Value Chain.
HowIndustrial Countries Keep their Competitive Power26Sophus A. Reinert, Darwin and the Body Politic: Schäffle, Veblen, and the Shift of Biological Metaphor in EconomicsAntonio Serra, Breve Trattato / A Short Treatise (1613) (available only in hardcopy and by request).Joseph L. Love, The Latin American Contribution to CenterPeriphery Perspectives: History and ProspectRonald Dore, Shareholder capitalism comes to Japan Per Högselius, Learning to Destroy.
Case studies of creative destruction management in the new EuropeGabriel Yoguel, Analía Erbes, Verónica Robert, and José Borello,Diffusion and appropriation of knowledge in different organiza-tional structuresErik S. Reinert and Rainer Kattel, European Eastern Enlargement as Europe's Attempted Economic Suicide?Carlota Perez, Great Surges of development and alternative forms of globalizationErik S. Reinert, Iulie Aslaksen, Inger Marie G. Eira, SveinMathiesen, Hugo Reinert & Ellen Inga Turi, Adapting to Climate Change in Reindeer Herding: The Nation-State as Problem andSolutionLawrence King, Patrick Hamm, The Governance Grenade: Mass Privatization, State Capacity and Economic Development inPostcommunist and Reforming Communist SocietiesReinert, Erik S., Yves Ekoué Amaïzo and Rainer Kattel.
The Economics of Failed, Failing and Fragile States: ProductiveStructure as the Missing LinkCarlota Perez.
The New Technologies: An Integrated View Carlota Perez, Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms The working paper series is edited by Rainer Kattel (kattel@staff.ttu.ee), Wolfgang Drechsler (drechsler@staff.ttu.ee), and Erik S. Reinert (reinert@staff.ttu.ee),who all of them will be happy to receive submissions, suggestions or referrals.8.
