 Innovation: The History of a Category Benoît Godin 385 rue Sherbrooke Est Montréal, Québec Canada H2X 1E3 benoit.godin@ucs.inrs.ca Project on the Intellectua l History of Innovation Working Paper No.
1 2008 Project on the Intellectual History of Innovation 385 rue Sherbrooke Est, Montreal, Quebec H2X 1E3 Telephone: (514) 499-4074 Facsimile: (514) 499-4065 www.csiic.ca 2 Abstract Innovation is everywhere.
In the world of goods (technology) certainly, but also in the realm of words.
Innovation is discussed in scientific and technical literature, in social sciences such as sociology, management and economics, and in the humanities and arts.
Innovation is also a central idea in the popular imaginary, in the media and in public policy.
How has innovation acquired such a central place in our society?
This paper looks at innovation as category, and suggests an outline for a genealogical history.
It identifies the concepts that have defined innovation through history, from its very first meaning as novelty in the Middle Ages to the most recent interpretations in sociology and economi cs.
The paper suggests a genealogical history of innovation through the following three concepts: Imitation → Invention → Innovation.
3 We have a "violent Fondness for change, and greater Eagerness after Novelties", B. Mandeville, The Fable of the Bees , 1732.
4 Introduction Innovation is everywhere.
In the world of goods (technology) cer tainly, but also in the realm of words: innovation is di scussed in the scien tific and technical literature, in social scie nces like history, sociolo gy, management and economics, and in the humanities and arts.
Innovation is also a central idea in the popular imaginary, in the media, in public policy and is part of everybody's vocabulary.
Briefly stated, innovation has become th e emblem of the modern society, a panacea for resolving many problems, a nd a phenomenon to be studied.
As H. Nowotny defines our epoch: it is a fasc ination and quest for innovation (Nowotny, 2008; 2006).
The quest for innovation is so strong that some go so far as to suggest that drugs like Ritalin and A dderall, used to treat psychiatric and neurological conditions, should be prescr ibed to the healthy as a cognitive enhancement "technology" for improving th e innovative abilitie s of our species (Greely et al., 2008).
First, why has innovation acquired such a central place in our society or, put different ly, where precisely does the idea of innovation come from?
To many, innovation is a relatively recent phenomenon and its study more recent yet: innova tion has acquired real importance in the twentieth century.
In point of fact, how ever, innovation has always existed.
The concept itself emerged centuries ago.
Th is suggests a second question: why did innovation come to be defined as technological innovation ?
Many people spontaneously understand innovation to be technological innovation.
The literature itself takes this for gran ted.
More often than not, studies on technological innovation simply use the term innovation, alth ough they are really concerned with technological innova tion.
However, etymologically and historically, the concept of innovation is much broader.
How, when and by whom did its meaning come to be "restricted" to technology?
Third, why is innovation generally understood, in many milieus, as commercialized innovation ?
It is hard today to imagine technology without thinki ng of the market.
One frequently hears 5 of innovations that are marketed by firms, but other types of innovation are either rapidly forgotten or rarely discussed.
By contrast, every individual is to a certain extent innovative; artists are innovative, scientists are innovative, and so are organizations in their day-to-day operations.
To answer these three questions, th is paper looks at innovation as a category and at its historical development.
The pape r is not a history of innovation itself (or innovations), neither a contextual history.
It looks rather at the representations of innovation and the discourses held in th e name of innovation, namely since the term first appeared in the Middle Ages : how the public, innovators themselves, and academics, and particularly the th eories of the latter, have understood innovation and talked about it.
This paper offers very preliminary ideas toward a genealogical history of the category "innovation".
It identifies the concepts that have defined innovation through history, and that have led to innovation as a central category of modern society.
It concentrates on the "creative" dimension of innovation.
This dimension got into innovation in the twentieth century.
At the very beginning, innovation was rather concerned with change, br oadly understood, and had nothing to do with creativity.
Innovation as change will be dealt with in another paper (Godin, 2009b).
The paper is programmatic in the sense that it suggests a program of research or outline for such a genealogical history, a history that remains to be written.
In the Archeology of Scientific Reason , M. Foucault asked "Comme nt se fait-il que tel concept soit apparu et nul autre à sa pl ace?
", (Foucault, 1969: 39-40) that is, under what conditions does a word come to mean what it signifies for us today?
To Foucault, a genealogy is a study of descent rather than origins: the details and accidents, the forces and struggles that accompany every conceptual beginning and its further "solidific ation" (Foucault, 1984).
6 7 In a recently-launched project on the intellectual history of innovation, of which this paper is the first in a series, a genealogical study is framed through concepts, their uses and their context.
1 As Q. Skinner suggested, words are markers of the social understanding of the world, and the emergence of new words is a marker of changes in society's values (Skinner, 1988).
Put differently, a new word "marks the moment when [a] change had beco me obvious enough to need a term to express it" (Smith, 1925: 69-70).
Innovation, or the new, does not exist as such.
It is c onstructed through the eyes and through discourses.
The genealogica l study suggested here rests on six elements.
It starts with the study of words (or terms), their genesis and transformation, and the cluste r of concepts involved in speaking about innovation: invention, ingenuity, imaginat ion, creativity, etc.
Second, it looks at the meanings of the concepts developed.
Such meaning usually goes from vagueness – firstly as a concept in construction where multiple terms are used, often interchangeably, and then with an implicit definition – to a relative stabilization.
Third, discourses held in the name of the concepts are identified.
The discourses on innovation have been generally of three kinds: innovati on as a factor for change in society, innovation as progress, 2 and innovation for its own sake, such as for personal recognition, prestige or professional identity.
Fourth, the values on which innovation relies are analyzed, since they often involve an "essential tension" and lead to the development of dichotomies, such as tradition versus innovation (Kuhn, 1959; Shils, 1981).
This part of the analysis calls on ce ntral categories of thought in Western history.
Fi fth, the theories and conceptual models developed to explain innovation are studied, from the very early "psychological" models to more recent sociological and economic one s. The sixth and final element in the genealogical history of innovation is the study of the context in which the 1 As J.G.A.
Pocock suggested, before conducting a sociology of ideas, one has to understand "what the ideas were that were in use at a particul ar time, what in fact th ey said and implied, and on what commonly accepted assumptions and met hods they were based" (Pocock, 1989: 106).
2 Progress in civilization (evolutionists, anthropo logy), in well-being (sociology), in growth (economics), in knowledge and the control of nature (philosophy).
category emerged: economy (trade), politics (the courts), and culture (expressiveness, awareness of history).
This paper advances three hypotheses in order to guide a genealogical history of innovation as category.
The firs t hypothesis starts with the idea that innovation is about novelty (arising from human creativity), as etymology, dictionaries and history suggest.
As such, innovation is of any kind, not only material or technological.
In this sense, innovation as category has a ve ry long history.
However, over time the conjunction of two factors gave preeminence to technological and commercialized innovation in representations: 1) the culture of things and its capitalistic corollary: industrial development through technology, 2) academics, the study of technology, and the conceptual frameworks that followed for policies in science and economic growth.
In fact, there is a dialectics here between reality and language.
Events and changes in the world gave rise to new categories; the latter in turn brought to light changes in the world and, in doing so, contributed to these changes.
The second hypothesis is that the history of innovation as "creativity" is that of three concepts (and their derivatives): Imitation → Invention → Innovation .
Certainly, a lot has been written on imitation (literary theory and art theory), as well as invention (histor y, sociology, management a nd economics of technology).
But no one has ever brought the two concepts together in a genealogical history, and neither has anyone looked at their c ontribution to the category innovation.
Through Western history, imitati on and invention have been contrasted, or are in tension.
The dichotomy reaches its resolu tion with the idea of innovation in the twentieth century, particularly the idea of innovation as pro cess: invention and imitation are two sequential steps in the process leading to innovation.
The third hypothesis is about innovation as a break with the past .
Innovation and the discourses on innovation serve to make sense of modern practices and values.
On the one hand, innovation repr esents continuity with the past.
It is continuity in 8 9 the sense that innovation is about novelty, an idea that was present in many forms before innovation took on a centr al place in representations, as we will see.
It is also continuity in the sense that innovation is, to many, concerned with technological invention, which is a dominant understanding of what invention came to mean over time.
However, on the other hand innovation is a break with the past in the sense that it suggests that invention per se is not enough.
There has to be use and adoption of the invention, namely innovation, in order for benefits to accrue.
At this stage of the project, the first two parts of this paper (imitation, invention) are based on secondary sources.
The thir d part (innovation) is composed entirely of original research and constitutes the core of the paper.
It identifies the theories on innovation proper, and their emergen ce over the twentieth century.
The period covered in this paper ends around 1970-90, which was when innovation developed its current unders tanding in representations, and when the literature on innovation exploded.
3 Imitation Imitation is a concept of Greek origin.
McKeon (1936) has documented how Plato's philosophy is entirely concerned with imitation and its many senses and opposites: appearances (or images) – versus reality; falsity – versus truth.
To Plato, even physical objects are imitations, compared to God and true nature.
But it is through Aristotle that the concept of imitation got its main influence.
To Aristotle, (practical) arts imitate nature ( mimesis ).
Such an understanding of art gave rise to imitatio as the central problem of art, with pejorative overtones, then to imitation as inspiration (Abrams, 1953; Nahm, 1956).
As M. H. Abrams has stated, the mimetic orientation was the mo st primitive aesthetic theory (Abrams, 3 The author wants to thank the following colleagues for comments on a first draft of this paper: Irwin Feller, Paul Forman, Deni se Lemieux, Pamela Long, Pierre Lucier, Christine Macleod, Reijo Miettinen, Helga Nowotny, Jean-Jacques Salomon.
4 Art imitates the world of appearance.
The "artist" extracts the form of the natural world and imposes it upon an ar tificial medium (Abrams, 1953: 11).
In fact, "wherever the Renaissance theorist turned, he usually found the concept of invention somehow subordinated to the imitation of nature" (Kushner, 1980: 144).
5 However, according to most theories, imitation is only "instrumental toward producing effects" (Abrams, 1953: 14).
In their quest for soci al status, artists debated for centuries on how to distance themselves from a conception of their work as mere copying.
As E. T. Bannet s uggested recently, imitation is a literary mechanism for the production of differe nce (Bannet, 2005).
Until the mideighteenth century, imitation was presented as a positive practice, not one that was distrusted or pejorative.
To rhetor icians, imitation is a method for teaching (Clark, 1951).
To Renaissance artists, im itation certainly makes use of nature as model, or exemplar.
However, it is not slavish or mechan ical imitation, but selective borrowing and creative copying.
Si milarly, while humanist writers in the Renaissance make use of past authors (antiquity) as models, it is aemulatio , and the writer enriches the tradition.
In fact, the artist, the poet a nd the writer in the Renaissance were not yet being judged for originality (Force, 2005; Cole, 1995; Wittkover, 1965), but rather for interpretati on.
There was little sense of copyright – although accusations of plagiarism abounded (Hathaway, 1989; White, 1935).
And so it is with science and arts.
To Francis Bacon, one comes closer to real knowledge of nature by imitating nature .
As he described his experimental method in Magna Instauratio : "these things are quite new; totally new (.
): and yet they are copied from a very ancient model, the world itself and the nature of 4 On the representation of art before the Greek "theory" of mimesis – art as "presentification" of the divine rather than a human creative act –, see Vernant and Zeitlin (1991).
5 On the different of meaning of imitation of nature in art, see Lovejoy (1927) and Lovejoy and Boas (1935).
In history, the "naturalist presump tion" is a widespread idea: what humans do, in literature, arts, crafts and science is a (continua tion or) perfection of nature (Close, 1969).
To many, above all philosophers, nature is generally considered as more primitive and more authentic.
Nature functions as a cultural value and social norm.
Nature has a moral authority (Bensaude-Vincent and Newman, 20 07; Daston and Vidal, 2004).
6 In the world of trade and goods, imitation is also positively appreciated.
M. Berg and H. Clifford have documented how imitations served as substitutes for imported commodities in eighteenth-century Britain (Berg, 1999; Clifford, 1999).
Imitation was a way to give access to luxury goods (decorative goods, clothing, household ware s) to the people, through "semiluxuries".
In the case of the decorative arts over th e same period, R. Benhamou has documented the contribution of imitati on to lowering the costs of original products (Benhamou, 1991).
Briefly stated, imitation is taken for granted and is a common practice.
Imitation brings advant ages to the people; it represents economic opportunity.
In more recent history, R. R. Nelson and S. G. Winter (1982), in a classic of the literature on technological i nnovation, suggested imitation as one of two strategies available to firms, the other being i nnovation.
As early as 1966, T. Levitt from Harvard Business School suggested the same idea: "because no single company can afford even to try to be first in everything in its field", a company is compelled "to look to imitation as one of its survival and growth strategies" (Levitt, 1966: 65).
In fact, to Levitt "the greatest flow of newness is not innovation at all.
He was referring to the fact that when "competitors in the same industry subsequently copy the innovator [a given firm or industry which has produced something th at has never been seen before], even though it is something new for them, then it is not innova tion, it is imitation" (Levitt, 1966: 63).
A company creates "its own imitative equivalents of the innovative products created by others".
Not only, then, is imitation a good practice, but imitation has often been portrayed as being invention itself.
The view in th e Middle Ages of the work of artisans is that of art learned by imita ting nature, but in so doing, the artisan changes nature, as claimed by the alchemists (Newman, 1989).
Equally, in Renaissance literary 6 On Bacon's description of his utopian laboratory (Salomon's house) as imitation of nature, see his description of instruments in New Atlantis (1627).
theory and visual arts, one finds recurrent descriptions of imitation as rediscovery of the old, as something "new" to copy, as something never seen before.
Here, "the charge of lies [imitation] is turned to an argument for the truth of poetic imagination" (Rossky, 1958: 69).
An argument frequently evoked is that imitation requires work, experimentation, judgment and imagination.
All these descriptions in literature, arts and crafts generally refer to an idea that has been very influential among many authors in defi ning invention, and subseque ntly innovation, as we will observe below: that of combination .
Imitation is invention because, when combining elements from nature, it combines the best of them, and by so doing improves nature.
Combination "creates a whol e that is more perfect than nature"; it is as nature ought to be (Wittkower, 1965: 148).
Equally, in combining previous schools of thought, the combination surp asses the work of past authors.
Compilatio , a "wide literary activity which encompassed various genres in the Middle Ages" (and after), is combination of others' material into a new work, a unio (Hathaway, 1989: 41).
But let's continue with imitation as invent ion in other areas.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, patents (and their pr ecursors in the fifteenth century: letters and privileges) were not granted to inventors, as they are today, but to importers of existing inventions, as a way to develop the local economy (Macleod, 1988; Popplow, 1998; Hilaire-Perez, 2000).
They were accompanied by laws restricting the mobility of artisans who possessed uni que skills or techniques (Epstein, 1988).
In addition, premiums and prizes we re awarded by societies of arts to imitations of existing foreign goods (Ber g, 1999).
Similarly, in consumer goods of eighteenth-century Britain, imitation was perceived as invention because it resulted in new commodities, introduced improvements in quality (design), and brought diversity and va riety (Berg, 1999; 2002: Clifford, 1999; Benhamou, 1991).
Due to a culture of taste, the goods or commodities a nd their aesthetic qualities evoke the distinctive and the exot ic, but also the latest technology and modernity.
12 13 Now, if we turn to the twentieth centur y, we clearly observe that imitation gave rise to, and was often used as a term for, diffusion.
As I discuss below, contemporary theories on innovation now include diffusion (or use) as a step in the innovation process.
In th is process, diffusion is really imitation, and the word appears in early theories, from the French sociologist Gabrie l Tarde in the 1890s to the economic literature on technological innovation in the 1980s.
As a matter of fact, in the sociological l iterature of the 1940-60s, an i nnovator is not an inventor but a user, defined as to time: the first user of an invention.
Equally, imitation gave rise to the idea of "adoption" as i nnovation itself: in recent theories on and measurements of technological innova tion, adopting an exis ting technology is a behaviour considered just as innovative as inventi ng (OECD, 2005), and not as mere imitation, as Levitt has suggested.
7 As F. Redlich put it, while not "genuine" (or primary) innovation, innovation by imitation is nevertheless (derivative and subjectiv e) innovation, as opposed to copying (Redlich, 1951).
In summary, imitation has rarely been separated from invention.
To many, imitation has close links to invention, a nd even constitutes invention itself.
However, with time imitation came to be contrasted to invention.
Starting from the mid-eighteenth centur y, imitation was regarded as mere copying, while originality became the criterion for real invention.
Invention Invention is a term that comes from rhetoric.
In classical rhetoric, invention was the first of five divisions of the rhetorical art.
Invention is com posed of guidelines to help speakers find an d elaborate language.
In De Inventione, Cicero (106-43 BC) defined invention as the "discovery of valid or s eemingly valid arguments to render one's cause probable".
However, in th e history of rhetoric, invention as so 7 See also the much cited concept "absorptive capac ities": the capacity of a firm to assimilate and apply (imitate) other firms' innovations (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990).
14 conceived has been eclipsed by one or more of the four other divisions (arrangement, style, memory and delivery).
Invention as a term in other domains really came to be used in the mid-fourteenth century as finding or discovery, namely with regard to knowledge, or science (knowing).
It came to be applied to making as well, in poetry (literary criticism), then in visual arts.
From the sixteenth century, invention was used more and more to apply to newly-created things (artifacts).
Let's look at the history of this evolution.
From late medieval Europe, the idea of invention spread everywhere, to different degrees and under different terms.
A whole cluster of words is used to name the new, as the list below indicates.
Certainly, as M. Kemp has noted, in the Renaissance, there was "no unanimity in usage of divino, ingegno, fantasia, immaginazione and invenzione" (Kemp, 1977: 397).
Equally, the term or terms associated with a specific field in the follo wing list are not exclus ive to that field, but are those that came to gain preeminence in that field (for a complete list of the vocabulary, see the Appendi x).
One thing is clear: in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the idea of novelty is everywhere and becomes very much a (positive) cultural value: - Philosophy: praxis 8 - Literary theory and visual arts : imagination, orig inality, creation - Arts and crafts (engineering): ingenium , invention - (Natural Philosophy and) science: disc overy, experiment, scientific change - History: change, revolution, progress - "Evolutionists": 9 growth, development, evol ution, variation, mutation 8 In philosophy, praxis has not really been theorized beca use of the emphasis on mind (Arendt, 1968; Lobkowic, 1957).
It slowly begins to be become an issue, quite imperfectly according to many, with expressiveness (J. G. Herder), utilitarianism (free w ill), existentialis m (life, will, consciousness), pragmatism (experience, inquiry), and the philosophy of action (Bernstein, 1971).
9 Following Bowler (1983), I group together under evolutionists: early geology, early paleontology, natural history, and biology.
- Anthropology: culture (or cultural) change - Sociology: action, social change - Psychology: attitude change; creativity - Management and politics: organizational change - Economics: entrepreneurship, te chnological change, innovation Nowhere is the idea of novelty more presen t than in science.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, science was frequently discussed as an active search or hunt ( venatio ), a very old metaphor (Eamon, 1 994; Hadot, 2004).
The scientific literature of the seventeenth century is full of the term "new", as L. Thorndike has documented (Thorndike, 1957), as well as the term "revolution" (Cohen, 1985).
10 Equally, the idea of progress is a major one during the Renaissance, the Enlightenment and subsequently (Bury, 1932; Zilsel, 1945; Sarton, 1962; Rossi, 1970: 63-99; Crombie, 1975; Bock, 1978; Nisbet, 1980; Marx, 1987; Spadafora, 1990).
Change became a preoccupation of study in many emerging scientific disciplines, from sociology (A. Comte, H. Spencer) and history (A. Ferguson) to natural philosophy, or the scie nces.
Geologists, natural histor ians and biologists from the eighteenth century are the "men of science" who have taken change most seriously.
Certainly, at that time, ch ange as the natural process for the development of life on earth was seen as preordained, even through the nineteenth century: God is the designer of all things and their development; the linear chain of being is constructed as leading invariably to man (Lovejoy, 1936).
But evolutionists, since before Darwin, have discussed change – as either linear, or cyclical or catastrophic (i n the case of the earth form ation), and as spontaneous generation and degeneration, then natura l selection (in the case of biological species) (Bowler, 1983; 1993).
The evolut ionists also developed influential sequential theories of how lif e and societies evolve (life-cycle theories), based on 15 16 the model of the embryo (birth, growt h, maturity).
Evolution, development, variation and mutation are only some of the key terms used here.
Whatever its name, the new is not without its opponents.
The Querelle between the ancients and the moderns, in literature and philos ophy but also in science and education, is that between imitati ng (and surpassing) the ancients versus a totally new enterprise (Jones, 1936).
This is perhaps the first sy stematic debate in history about the new as opposed to tradition.
In science, there is also the opposition with religion.
An argument frequently evoked he re is that of minimizing novelty, and portraying science as "new, but not so new": the purpose of scientific knowledge is to reveal the nature God has created; sc ience talks about what is real, not magic or superstition.
However, even among scient ists themselves, scie ntific invention is resisted (Cohen, 1952; Barber, 1961; Kuhn, 1962; 1963).
As with imitation, invention is perceived in different ways.
It is often di strusted and qualified as esoteric.
Similarly, hypothesis, as coming from the imagination and as the major faculty behind scientific invention but a sour ce of error for the rationalists, is said to be in need of control, namely a method, as Bacon suggests (Park, 1984).
11 Otherwise it leads to excesses, delusions and distortions, or to rhetoric and eloquence.
The defenders of invention often have an ideological aim: to distinguish oneself (identity) and to justify one's activitie s (image of scientists, inventors and writers), for purposes of patronage, among other things.
Hence, the construction of oppositions portraying tradition and th e like as static (transmission from generation to generation; irra tional and arbitrary) versus invention and the like as cumulative and progressive.
12 10 Friedman and Karlsson have recently computed th e exponential use of the word "novel" in titles of the current scientific literature, and have concluded: "in the morning hours of 7 February 2020 all science will be novel" (Friedman and Karlsson, 1997).
11 On the role of hypothesis (imagination) in science, see Laudan (1981), Park, Daston and Galison (1984).
12 Frequently heard oppositions are: Good versus bad imagination; imitation versus originality; science versus art; knowing versus imagining; objectivity versus subjectivity; books versus 17 Over time, invention in science came to share the vocabulary of writers with the term discovery .
In fact, for some time, invention meant finding as well as making, and was applied without qualifica tion to both activities.
Later, a distinction was made between the two concepts: discovery referred to facts or things that already exist out there and that one finds out, while invention combines and makes new things, including scientific theories (Wyman, 1929; Kneale, 1955).
However, since soci al constructivism (Hacking, 1999), the term "construction" seems to be the pref erred term, applying to both scientific discoveries and technological inventions.
Literature and visual arts are other fiel ds where the idea of novelty is widespread.
Contrary to science, with its emphasis on facts an d method and its negative assessment of imagination (Southgate, 1992 ), the "power of imagination" is rehabilitated.
In fact, literary theory and visual arts (paintin g, sculpture) in the Renaissance adapted invention from the literature on rhetoric (then from poetry) to a psychological process of imagination (Lee, 1940; Bundy, 1930; Spencer, 1957; Bond, 1935; 1937; Rossky, 1958).
Although im agination was, as in science, portrayed for a time as in need of cont rol, namely judgment and rules (Costa Lima, 1988), the real boundary work of the artist is agai nst imitation: imitation (as combination) is stigmatized as eclectici .
Real art is free and creative imagination (Cassirer, 1932: chapter 7; Abrams, 1953; Williams, 1961; Engell, 1981; Mason, 2003).
The passive role (reproducing) of imagination in medieval usage (as opposed to fantasy which combines) turned into an active faculty with the Romantics.
Originality came to define the artist (Mann, 1939; Mortier, 1982; Quint, 1983; McFarland, 1985), and the metaphor of creation – already present in Greek mythology (Prometheus) – ente red the vocabulary (Nahm, 1947, 1956; Tigerstadt, 1968; Mason, 1988) .
Certainly, originality, as with imitation and invention, carries negative connotations as well.
Until the nineteenth century, in observation; hypotheses versus data; tradition versus modernity; good versus bad effects of technology (benefits versus disasters).
18 social usage for example, an original person was bizarre, eccentric, ridiculed.
13 However, originality with the following two meanings gained credence over time.
Originality means origin, or source (authorship), and this meaning would be influential, as discussed below, in the case of technological invention.
It also means a distinctive quality of work, or novelty, unlike the imitation of the ancients, for example.
As such, originality came to characterize the genius, an important figure in the Renaissance and to the Romantic aut hors.
Genius as a concept has a long history.
First defined as spirit (which gave in spiration), it came to mean innate talent or ability ( ingenium ), then a person with superior creative powers, to which the Romantic conception has added the idea that genius defies rational analysis (Smith, 1925; Zilsel , 1926; Tonelli and Wittkower, 1968-70; Murray, 1989; Goodey, 2004).
Ingenuity was also a key concept for the artisan from the Middle Ages onward.
In fact, the artisan, first of all alchemists, th rough their art created new things in their opinion, and for the first time made art a creative force rath er than only an imitative entity or mirror-like representation (Newman, 2004).
14 Equally, in Renaissance painters, ceramists and sculpt ors really thought they were creating new things, not only practicing an imitativ e art (Smith, 2004).
This creative power over nature gave rise to the figure of the inventor, a genius or hero who, as to scientists and artists, wa s not without opponents.
As a matter of fact, it took time for inventors to be admitted to the pant heon of great men.
Up to the beginning of the nineteenth century, and again afte r the commercialization of technological inventions on a large scale at the end of this same century, the inventor was anonymous.
As C. MacLeod has discussed for Great Britain: inventors were merely the agents of providence in "dis covering" inventions in accordance with the divine plan.
The inventor was simply born at the right time and place, and was 13 On a very interesting sociological study of originality versus convention, see N. Elias on Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (Elias, 1993).
14 On the contribution of magic and alchemy (and the books of secrets: receipts, formulas, instructions, experiments as tests, or trials) to th e status of the arts and artisans, see White (1975), Newman (2004; 1989); Eamon (1994).
19 the last link in a causal chain (M acleod, 1996; 2006; 2007 Macleod and Tann, 2007; Macleod and Nuvolari, 2006).
While the idea of invention came to shar e its place with discovery in science (Branigan, 1981), and with imagination in literature and visual arts (Engell, 1981; Mason, 2003), it gradually and increasingly came to be identified preeminently with mechanical or technological invention , first of all in crafts and arts such as architecture, navigation, metallurgy and the military.
Early in the Renaissance, the term invention was applied to ingenious things like "machines, artifices, devices, engines, methods", for which a whole lite rature developed – treatises, histories and encyclopedias (Rossi, 1970; Long, 2001) – and for which the word technology subsequently became the category.
15 In the nineteenth century, engineering and works on bridges, tunnels and railways, then electrical systems add important inventions to the tec hnological landscape (Chandler, 1977; 1990; Beniger, 1986; Hughes, 1983).
This alignment of the term invention with technological invention was helped by the conventionalization, or institutionalization, of t echnological invention through privileges and patent laws from the late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries onward (Macleod, 1988; Cooper, 1991a; Popplow, 1998; Hilaire-Perez, 2000).
That invention as idea is itself an invention – a social invention – is now well admitted.
A scientific theory is invention because a system for attributing authorship to an individual exists, namely the scientific publication.
The sc ientific publication developed, in fact, as a mean to resolv e priority disputes (Merton, 1957; 1961; Branigan, 1981; Gross, 1989; Iliffe, 1992; Biagioli and Galison, 2003).
Similarly, the patent system is the institutional m echanism for deciding what a technological invention is and who owns it (Rae, 1967; Macleod, 1988).
As anthropologist O. T. Mason, curator at the US National Museum, put it in 1895: "The public 15 On the history of the term technology, from technique to artifact , see: Morère (1966), Guillerme and Sebestik (1968), Salomon (1984), Frison (1992; 1993), Marx (1994; 1997), Schatzberg (2006).
20 recognition and reward of invention may its elf be said to ha ve been invented" (Mason, 1895: 15).
It is through the patent system as ins titution that the criteria for a technological object's identity are negociated and invention is defined (Cooper, 1991b; Cambrosio et al., 1990): in fact, all technolog ical inventions are defined here, whether it is patented or not.
Ever since the first modern patent laws in the late eighteenth century, three criteria have characterized technological invention (Lubar, 1990).
First, originality as to quality of work, or novelty.
Applications are examined for novelty before a patent is granted.
Gone is th e idea of imitation: transformations and improvements to exis ting goods are more and more difficult to patent.
A t echnological invention, to qualify as such, has to be substantially new.
With time , what constitutes novelty is increasingly settled through the judicial system, which arbitrates competing claims.
The second criterion is originality as to origin, or priority.
Here, patents institutionalized the then-emerging idea of intellectual property (authorship), whose roots date from the Middle Ages (Long, 2001).
Patent laws add property rights to inventions.
16 The third criteria suggested for the patented invention is utility, and this is crucial for understandi ng invention as technological invention.
E. Zilsel, in his seminal study on the idea of genius, documented a shift in the idea of genius during the Renaissa nce.
From being applied to the output of the artist, genius became something attributed to th e artist as person, a subjectivization of the idea (Zilsel, 1926).
Howeve r, in the larger context of innovation, as discussed in this paper, it is the opposite which is observed.
As patent s attest, the qualities previously attributed to the genius or artist (like originality) become those attributed to the commodity.
16 Copyright laws have followed a similar but distinct development.
Early privileges for printed editions of books were basically for printers, not authors.
Rights to writers developed after patent laws.
However, and contrary to patents, originality is a requirement of copyright only in the sense that it originates in the copyright claimant, not that it is original in the sense of novelty.
Over time, technological invention obtained a relative "monopoly" in the vocabulary of invention because of the culture of things , or material culture – and patents are witness to this phenomenon.
The origins of this culture goes back to the Renaissance: due to commercial exchanges, exploratio n and travel (Cook, 2007; Smith and Findlen, 2002), natural and ar tificial objects ha ve been what is valued in arts, science, and real life.
This is not to say that technical invention had no opponents, quite the contrary.
Before the ninetieth century, technical invention commonly carried negative connotations , because of the many technical, managerial and financial difficulties of projects and "projectors" (Godin, 2009b).
Another aspect of this opposition is the re sistance to technology in the workplace.
From the industrial revolution in Great Britain to the debate on technological unemployment and displacement in the United States in the 1930s, many questioned the benefits of machines, and refused, often violently, the introduction of new processes in industry (Stern , 1937; Pearson, 1979; Berg, 1980; Randall, 1986; Bix, 2000).
Over time, the culture of things has developed and owes its existence to many factors.
One such factor is the "consum er revolution" (Berg and Clifford, 1999; Thirsk, 1979): the sixteenth century and after brought new consumer goods to the people.
These new goods were a respons e to expressed needs for a better existence, an old motive, as L. Dres beck (1979) and L. White (1971) have discussed with respect to the Middle Ages , but also in response to taste (a moral idea, then an aesthetic one), and its manifestation in luxuries and semi-luxuries as novelties (Berg, 1999).
The emergence of economic thought in the seventeenth century, with its emphasis on gain, wealth and material prosperity, is witness to this phenomenon (Dumont, 1977).
A second f actor is what came to be called the "industrial revolution" and the use of technologies in industrial processes (Toynbee, 1884; Ashton, 1948; Hudson, 1992; Coleman, 1992; Hardy, 2006).
Then, a third "revolution", or innovation, o ccurred at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century: (large) firms began setting up research laboratories as a way to accel erate industrial development (US National 21 Research Council, 1941; Noble, 1977).
Whitehead put it long ago, "the greatest invention of the ni neteenth century was the invention of the method of invention".
Men have invented a me thod for (systematic and cumulative) invention (Whitehead, 1925: 120; see al so Lippman, 1934).
By 1920, there were approximately 300 industrial re search laboratori es in the United States alone, and twenty five years later indus trial research accounted for more than two-thirds of national expenditures devoted to research and development (R&D) in many countries.
Along with the patent system discussed above, the development of industries based on the re search laborato ry and the commercialization of technological inventions on a large scale were major factor s contributing to a conception of invention as technological invention.
Briefly stated, technological inventions got increased attention because they have utilitarian value (Long, 2001; Hilaire-Perez, 2000; Macleod, 1988) – as opposed or contrasted to Ancient knowledge, as it was often said from Bacon onward.
They contribute to politics: technology and arts, such as painting, sculpture, and architecture, serve as political and militar y power, and as manifestations of power (displays of grandeur, wealth and magnifi cence).
They also contribute to "social progress".
From the medieval guilds (Eps tein, 1988) to the mercantilists (Johnson, 1930), from the Enlightenment to the twenti eth century, the literature is full of mentions of progress and utility from technological inventions with regard to contributing to character (virtue) of the individual, to social well-being, and to civilization.
Finally, tec hnological inventions as power over nature serve commerce, trade and manufacturing – activitie s seen positively at the time, as A. O. Hirshman (1977) has documented.
From the nineteenth century onward, these beliefs led to narratives on modernity and technologies from everyone: from "ordinary people" to intellectuals (M arx, 1964; Kasson, 1976; Nye, 1997; 2003; Noble, 1998; Hard and Jamison, 1998; Rieger, 2005).
Things and utility have a place in scie nce too.
First, the ne w sciences of the seventeenth century increas ingly relied on the study of objects of nature.
22 23 Observation, namely the collection of objects and the compilation of data, and measurement, with techniques or technologi es as instruments, are the keywords here.
There is a rehabilitati on of curiosity, which was a vice to Christian writers like Augustine (Eamon: 1994 58-66, 301-318) and others before him, but which became a quality of the virtuoso, that is, the cultivat ed gentleman (Houghton, 1942), giving rise to one of the most central concepts of science, that of objectivity (Harrison, 2001; Daston, 1995).
17 Things like marvels, wonders, rarities and exotics (Daston and Park, 1998) also find a place in cabinets of curiosities, as precursor s to museums (Findlen, 1994; Impey and MacGregor, 1985).
Second, there are also calls, for which F. Bacon is the main exponent, for more useful knowledge in science, namely for the mechanical arts and artificial objects.
18 To Bacon, "the real and legitimate goal of the sciences is the endowment of the human life with new inventions and riches" ( Novum Organum, 1620: aphorism no.
Bacon is followed by R. Boyle as one of the most serious defenders of his views, and by the scientific academies (Briggs, 1991; Ochs, 1985).
19 That mixed mathematics and mechanical arts have u tility, that machine technology benefits the public and industries becomes an argum ent for the promotion of science and for securing patronage (Cochrane, 1 956; Keller, 1972; Stewart, 1998; 1992).
Innovation Novation is a term that first appeared in law in the thirteenth century.
It meant renewing an obligation by changing a contract for a new debtor.
The term was rarely used in the various arts and sciences before the twentieth century – 17 There is very good literature on the history of objectivity from L. Daston, P. Galison, S. Schaeffer and S. Shapin (see also Poovey, 1998; Shapiro, 2000).
From this literature, one could develop a genealogical history of objectivity in three steps as follows: curiosity → matters of fact → objectivity.
18 The fascination with machines entered science very early, via the mech anical philosophy.
The metaphor of the clock for explaining different aspects of nature is one of the most well-known examples in the scientific literature.
On the analogy of knowing to making (machines), see Crombie (1994: chapter 14).
24 although "new" was, as mentioned above.
Cr eate and invent were preferred words for man's productive power and crea tive abilities.
N. Machiavelli ( The Prince, 1513) and F. Bacon ( Of Innovations , 1625) are among the very few individuals having devoted early pages to innovation, using the term as such, and to the resistance of people to innovation.
20 There has also been a controversy on innovation, the first of its kind, in religion in mid-seventeenth century England (Godin, 2009b).
All these writings and debates were conc erned with innovation as change, not creativity.
In fact, as with imitation and inventi on, innovation was pejorative for a while.
Until the eighteenth century, a "novator" was still a suspicious person, one to be mistrusted.
Before the twentieth century, there had been two episodes in history where innovation was opposed.
The first wa s in political and religious matters.
Because of tradition, political change was negatively received, and because of orthodoxy, innovation was considered heresy ; thereafter innova tion was identified with the introduction of anything deviant in political affairs and in the Church.
The second episode was during the eight eenth century, when inventors started making money from their inventions.
Proj ectors, as the innovators were then called, became objects of satire by many authors because of insufficient science, bad management and fraud.
In this section, I document how innovation gradually cam e to resolve the tension between imitation and invention, at least at the theoretical le vel.
Until innovation took on a central place in theories on social and economic change, imitation and invention (under different terms, as disc ussed above) were seen as opposites, as was the case in social practices.
In the ei ghteenth century, for example, originality was contrasted to copying and plagiarism (imitation) in authorship (Woodmansee, 1984; Long, 2001).
Equally, under patent laws , property (of the first inventor) gave rise to accusations of theft (im itation) (Macleod, 1988; Hilaire-Perez, 2000).
19 One should also include here the reformers of learning like S. Hartlib, J. Dury, W. Petty and J. Evelyn in England (Houghton, 1957; Jones, 1936).
25 Similarly, the very first theories on i nnovation explicitly contrasted imitation to invention.
While previous theories of i nvention were of a "psychological" kind and focused on inspiration, imagination and genius (Bundy, 1927), the end of the nineteenth century saw the emergence of new theories for explaining novelty, and these were of a social kind.
The firs t such theories arose in anthropology.
Anthropology made very few uses of the term innovation.
Innovation was nevertheless what anthropologists of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century studied as culture change: changes in culture traits, but also inventions in agriculture, trade, social and political organizations (law, customs, religion, family) and technology.
It is impossible to examine all of the voluminous literature produced on culture change in th is paper; neither is it possible to analyze to what extent the theories that were produced really studied change as a process.
However, one debate deserv es mention here.
Many anthropologists framed the discussion in terms of inve ntion versus diffusion (as imitation) to explain stages of civiliza tion.
This gave rise to wh at came to be called the diffusion controversy (Smith et al., 1927).
On one side were evolutionists, to whom invention stems from multiple centers and occurs independently in different cultures.
Parallel inventions, as they were called, reflect the psychic unity of human nature, and di fferences in culture reflect steps of the same process, or varying speeds of evolution.
21 Primitives were considered to be at an arrested stage of development.
An associated discussion here was whether there was convergence between cultures, or divergence.
22 20 On Bacon and novelty, see Whitney (1986).
On Machiavelli and innovation, see Pocock (1975).
21 Precursors on parallel inventions are evolu tionists in archeology (G. de Mortillet) and paleontology (multiple centers, discontinuous inven tion: R. Owen, G. S. Mivart, H. F. Osborn), historians (W. Robertson on parallel invention, but at different rates), and philologists.
22 Convergence refers to things originally differ ent that have become the same, and divergence to things originally the same that have become diffe rent.
For the first discussion of the principle of limited possibilities of divergence, see Goldenweiser (1913).
26 At the opposite end were diffusionists, to whom man is esse ntially uninventive.
23 Culture emerges from one center, then diffuses through borrowings, migrations and invasions.
24 This gave rise to a whole literature on culture areas (culture circles in Germany), where diffusion is due to geographic contiguity (O. T. Mason, G. Holmes, A. L. Kroeber and C. Wissler).
Until about the mid-twentieth centur y, evolutionism was the framework anthropologists used to study culture ch ange.
Then acculturation, as the study of cultural change resulting from contacts between different cultures, developed (Redfield et al., 1936; Barnett et al., 1954).
Anthropologists stopped looking at diffusion as mere imitation contrasted to invention: diffusion is inventive adaptation.
Among anthropologists, one aut hor stands apart: H. G. Barnett (Godin, 2009a).
Barnett developed a comp rehensive theory of innovation, defined as "any thought, behavior, or thing that is new because it is qualitatively different from existing forms" (Barnett, 1953: 7).
To Barnett, everyone is an innovator, but he could not find a precise and thoroughgoing analysis of how innovation occurs in the literature.
Most studies, he said, concentrated on technological invention – and his use of the term innova tion is motivated by the desi re to eliminate this bias.
From ethnological researches in ethnic groups and religious cults, he developed such a theory.
However, Barnett had no followers among anthropologists.
We have to turn to sociologists, and then economists, to find the systematic development of studies on innovation.
The first theory of innovation comes from the French sociologist Gabriel Tarde in the late nineteenth century (Tarde, 1890; 1895; 1898; 1902).
Tarde's sociology distinguished statics from dynamics, 25 and was interested in explaining social 23 According to M. Harris (1968), diffusionists were responsible for the invention/diffusion dichotomy in anthropology, while evolutionists (lik e E. B. Tylor and L. H. Morgan) were said to admit both invention and diffusion.
To J. Stewart, there are three dichotomies in the debate: unilinear/multilinear evolution, invention/diffus ion, parallel invention/convergence (Stewart, 1955).
24 Precursors to diffusionism are evolutionists in biogeography (one center, then migration: A. R. Wallace and J. D. Hooker), an d biology (C. Darwin and the common ancestor to men).
25 With this distinction, Tarde foresh adowed J.A.
27 change (or social evolution): grammar, language, religion, law, constitution, economic regime, industry and arts.
Tarde made widespread use of the term innovation (and novation) as novelty, but with no explicit definition.
In fact, he used a whole cluster of te rms to discuss social cha nges: invention, ingenuity, novelty, creation, originality, imagin ation, discovery and initiative.
Tarde's theory of innovation was threefold: invention → opposition → imitation.
26 Inventions give rise to imitation – imitations of a lim ited number of inventions, because of the opposition or competition between the new and the old inventions.
27 The success of an invention (i.e.
: imitation) depends on other inventions (or opposition between inventions) and social factors.
To Tarde, invention is the combination of previous or elementary inventions (i.e.
Invention comes from individuals (not necessarily great men), and is socially influenced.
To Tarde, invention is the driv ing force of society, but society is mainly imitative: custom, fashion, sympathy, obedience and e ducation.
Imitation is to society what heredity is to biology, and vibration to electricity.
One had to wait for E. M. Rogers (1962) for other such broad theories of innovation in sociology.
As to praxis in philosophy, and culture change in anthropology, the extent to which sociolog ists have really st udied change is a matter of debate.
Certainly, social change has been studied in sociology, from A. Comte, H. Spencer, P. Sorokin and their gr and stages theories based on the lifecycle metaphor, then T. Parsons, 28 then studies like social movements as a source of social change, or the study of "development" in de veloping countries (Watson, 1953; Boskoff, 1957; Nisbet, 1969; Eisens tadt, 1973).
However, to many critics over time sociologists have been concerned with imitation (as socialization) rather 26 The French sociologist A. Espinas (1897), his praxeology and his discussion on animal societies (ants) was a source for Tarde's model of individual initiative followed by imitation.
27 On Tarde's theory of opposition, see Tarde (1897).
28 To Parsons, the social sciences may be all cla ssified as "sciences of action".
However, a theory of social change "is not possible in the pres ent stage of knowledge" (Parsons, 1951: 486).
28 than with creative action (Hield, 1954; Joas, 1996; Berk and Galvan, 2009).
29 The study of individual creativ ity was left to psychology.
30 Be it as it may, one thing is sure: sociologists with an inte rest in technology, to whom we now turn, took change seriously.
What the subsequent theories of innovation have done is put an end to the contrast between imitation and invention.
From th e 1920s onward, invention came to be understood as a process (both diachronic and synchronic).
Theories now combine invention and imitation in a sequence, that is, a linear "model": invention is followed by imitation.
The first such theo ries came from sociologists (Godin, 2009e).
The Americans W. F. Ogburn and S. C. Gilfillan were forerunners, but in fact rehearsed many arguments of the ni neteenth century (McGee, 1995; Macleod, 2007: chapter 6 and 9).
Both positione d themselves against the views of anthropology and its theories of evolution by stages, because "the achievements have not been up to the high hopes" a nd have been disproved (Ogburn, 1922: 57), and against "great men" theories in ph ilosophy and history.
To Gilfillan, the great man or genius as hero is a mythology for historical origin "to increase the cohesion of the group and its loyalty to its living leaders" (Gilfillan, 1935: 77-78).
31 Ogburn and Gilfillan starte d looking at inventions, above all technological inventions, as causes of cultural change or social change (social organizations and cul ture to other parts of the world.
29 For example, to R.K. Merton innovation (as rejection of institutional means to social goals or norms) is (one of four types of) deviant behavior.
On a refinement of Merton's thesis and a more constructive view of innovation, see Dubin (1959).
H. Joas (1996) argues that there has been no real theory of creativity in sociology.
To many sociologists, action is rationality rather than cr eativity.
"Creativity" is non-rational: a residual, a deviation.
But from a genealogical perspective, the authors and the theories Joas discusses (Durkheim, Weber, Tonnies, Simmel, Parsons) are steps or precursors, not "metaphors" as he called them, and should be studied in a genealogical history of innovation.
30 Following N. Machiavelli, W. Pareto has contrasted types of individual as to whether they are innovative (foxes) or conservative (lions) (Pareto, 1935).
However, he did not devoted analyses to the process of innovation itself.
31 The role of genius in civilization was an idea widely debated in philosophy (W. James versus G. Allen), in history (T. Carlyle versus the Spencerians, the Hegelians and the Marxists), in science (F. Galton on heredity versus A. de Candolle), and Tarde has previously positioned himself on the question.
In anthropology, it was discussed in terms of great civilizations and the diffusion of 29 behaviours).
32 To Ogburn, "the use of material th ings is a very important part of the culture of any people" (Ogburn, 1922: 4).
What he observed was the growth and acceleration of materi al culture, as would be documented quantitatively by American sociologist H. Hart from the 1930s to the 1960s (Hart, 1931; 1957; 1959), and its enormous consequences on so ciety, or social change, a field he studied for over thirty years.
Ogburn deve loped the concept of the cultural lag to account for this process.
Th ere is an increasing lag be tween the material culture (technology) and the rest of culture (adaptive culture) due to inertia and lack of social adaptation.
Hence the need for control and adjustment, forecasting and planning.
To the sociologists, technological invention is a combination of prior art and ideas, and a complex of diverse elements: design, science, material, method, capital, skill and management (Gilfillan, 1935: 6).
It is a social process rather than an individual one.
Certainly "without th e inventor there can be no inventions" (Gilfillan, 1935: 78), but "the inventors are not the only individuals responsible for invention" (Gilfillan, 1935: 81).
Social forces like dem ographic (race) and geographic factors, and "cultural herita ge" play a part.
Secondly, technological invention is social in a s econd sense: it is cumulative (or evolutionary), namely the result of accumulation and accretion of minor details, modifications, perfectings, and minute additions over cent uries, rather than a one-step creation (Gilfillan, 1935: 3).
33 Finally, technological invention is social in a third sense: it is more and more systematic.
It comes from organized research laboratories specifically dedicated to th is end.
Recalling industrialis ts' discourses of the time, the sociologists observed a movement from the independent inve ntor to organized research in industrial laboratories (Gilfillan, 1935: 52-54, 63; Hart, 1931: 552562).
32 To anthropologists, technology is rather an effect (a sign of civilization) to be explained.
33 In sociologists' hands, this idea became a leitmotif, although one had to wait until the 1980s and after for empirical studies of what came to be called technological "dev elopment".
For an early discussion of technological development among so ciologists, see Jewkes et al.
30 What place does the term and category of innovation take in sociological novation, in the hands of Ogburn and his contemporaries, meant many things.
In studying the literature, one observes a move from multiple terms used interchangeably to innovati on according to an implicit definition, then to explicit definitions.
In the voluminous literature produced by Ogburn, the most frequent terms are the combined one invention/ discovery and technology.
There is no use of the term innovation until it appears occasionally in both a paper from 1941 (Ogburn, 1941: 3, 14, 18) a nd the 1950 edition of Social Change (Ogburn, 1950: 378), and then in the title of a chapter (plus p. 710) from the fourth edition of Sociology (Ogburn and Nimkoff, 1964).
Simila rly, Gilfillan made no use of the term, but twice (Gilfillan, 1935: 59; 1937: 20).
In the meantime, however, the term began to appear among other sociologi sts, at first concu rrently with other terms, like technological change (Stern, 1927, 1937; Chapin, 1928; Davis, 1940).
Then one finds more widespread use of the term (Hart, 1931; Nimkoff, 1957), and entire theories devoted to innovation (Rogers, 1962).
InOne was simply novelty (Kallen, 1930).
In this sense, the use of the term is rare, and is without real consequences for so ciological theories.
A second meaning is social change (Stern, 1927), and this m eaning includes more than technological invention, that is, social invention as repeatedly suggest ed by Ogburn and some others (Bernard, 1923; Chapin, 1928: chapter 11; Weeks, 1932), or social experiments (Chapin, 1917).
34 However, with time, Ogburn and others sociologists focused more on technological invention, although two authors on scientific innovation deserves ment ion (Ben-David, 1960a; 1960b; 1964: 470-76; 1966; Mulkay, 1969; 1972a; 1972b; 1975; Mulkay and Turner, 1971).
35 A third meaning is the use of (technological) inven tions – and their social effects (Stern, 1937).
For example, to sociologists an innovator is not one who invents but adopts an invention for the first time.
This gave rise to studies on diffusion and to 34 See also the (short-lived) literature on "technicways" (Odum, 1937; Davis, 1940).
On organizational innovation, see below.
35 To a certain extent, studies on scientific growth (development and diffusion) are concerned with innovation.
31 a whole literature, often of a quantitati ve nature, with geometrical laws of diffusion (Chapin, 1928).
This meani ng of innovation as technological invention used and adopted is the common sociological understanding of innovation, although a fourth meaning would soon be used as well, following the economists' definition (see below): technological inve ntion as commercialized by industry (Jewkes et al.
Despite this understanding, explicit definitions of innovation are rare among - Hart (1931): making new working adjustments (combination) among ed to transform the environment 2): an idea, procedure or object perceived as new by its hat characterizes the sociolog ical literature is that i nnovation is described as an novation as process is also how econo mists understand the category.
However, including the sociologists.
The earl y few definitions that exist differ considerably.
Certainly, they all refer to the idea of novelty, but they differ in the sense that some include the act itself (combination), others the impacts of innovation, still others the subjective perception of it: material and socio-psychological culture - Ogburn (1941): inventions that have se rv profoundly - Rogers (196 adopter Wactivity and as a process where both the production of an invention and its use are discussed rather than contrasted (Nim koff, 1957).
Invention and imitation (as adoption or diffusion) are steps in a linear sequence (Table 1).
Ineconomists add their own stamp to the idea: innovation is the commercialization of (technological) invention.
And unlike the definitions of so ciologists, this definition came with time to be accepted among economists, and by others, 32 Table 1.
Sociologists' Sequences of Innovation Tarde (1890) burn (1920) Invention (and diffusion), maladjustment (lag)/adjustment ernard (1923) Formula, blue print, machine 36 diffusion 3 ) ental invention; t), first practical use, commercial success, US National Resources ) Ogburn Idea, development, model, invention, improvement, marketing otion, usion he study o f change is not the traditional concern of economics.
Historically, conomics is concerned with equilibrium rather than dynamics (Veblen, 1898; Invention, imitation, opposition Og B C hapin (1928) Invention, accumulation, selection, Ogburn and Gilfillan (19 3 Idea, trial device (m odel or pl ), demonstration, regular an use, adoption Gilfillan (1935) Idea; sketch; drawing; model; full-size experim commercial practice Gilfillan (1937) Thought, model (paten important use Committee (1937 Beginnings, development, diffusion, social influences and Nimkoff (1940) Ogburn (1941) Idea, plan, tangible form, improvement, production, prom mark eting, sales Ogburn (1950) Invention, accumulation, diffusion, adjustment Rogers (1962) Innovation , diffusion, adoption 37 Rogers (1983) Needs/problems, research, development, commercialization, diff and adoption, consequences TeWeintraub, 1991).
Although the concepts of work (labour), production and growth held central pla ce in early economic theori es, the study of economic change is not a fundamental concept in economics, as cultu re change is in anthropology or as social change is in sociology.
Change really got into economics with the study of technology as a cause of economic growth.
Karl Marx was a forerunner here (Sweez y, 1968; Rosenberg, 1976a).
To Marx, changes in techniques of production gave ri se to modern indus try.
Machines gave 36 For social invention, the stages are: th eory, rules, organizations and institutions.
37 Adoption itself is composed of steps, or stages, as first suggested and popularized by Beal and Bohlen (1955): awareness, intere st, evaluation, trial, adoption.
33 rise to 1) the capital-goods sector, and to 2) increases in productivity in other sectors of the economy.
Machines were al so a major factor in social change, through crisis, then through revolution.
However, it is to mainstream econom ists that we owe the first interest in chnological innovation, then called technological change, as the use of hange can be traced back to the years llowing the Great Depression, when the bicentennial debate on the role of tetechnological inventions in industrial processes.
This l iterature is often minimized and contrasted to the late r literature from evolutionary economists.
However, from a genealogical point of view, this l iterature was a first step toward the study of technological innovation in economics.
It was here that (some) interest in technology began among economists.
Increased interest in technological cfomechanization on employment reem erged.
The issue of technological unemployment gave rise to a series of theoretical classifications of technologies (as to whether they are labour-saving, capital- saving or neutral) as part of larger discussions on economic theory (P igou, 1924: 629-638; Hicks, 1932: 121-125; Robinson, 1938).
The theoretical discussions of the time were very brief (with the exception of Cambridge economist J. Robi nson), until resurrected in the 1960s under the name "induced innovation".
In fact , the literature on induced innovation is probably the first to make extensive us e of the term innovation in economics.
In the meantime, the study of technology developed in the 1930s via the measurement of productivity: increases in productivity as an indicator of technology usage.
Many quantitative studi es were published by the US National Bureau of Economic Research (F.C.
Mills , H. Jerome) and public organizations like the US Bureau of Labor Statistics and the US Work Projects Administration.
Subsequently, formalization of the m easurement developed through what was called the production function.
34 The production function is an equation sugge sted in the late 1920s that links the he term technological change, already us ed by sociologist B. J. Stern in 1937, quantity produced of a good (output) to quantities of inputs (Cobb and Douglas, 1928; Douglas, 1948).
There are at any given time, or so argue economists, inputs (labour, capital) available to the firm, and a large vari ety of techniques by which these inputs can be combined to yield the desired optimal output.
The production function came to be interpreted as repr esenting technological change, a precursor term to technological innovation in economics.
Economists interpreted movements in the curve of the production function as technological change (the substitution of capital for la bour), while others equate d labour produc tivity with technology (technological change is likely to result, all other things being equal, in increased labour productiv ity), paving the way for R. Solow's influential paper which equated the residual in the pr oduction function with technology (Solow, 1957).
Then economists started correlati ng R&D with productivity measures.
Beginning in the late 1950s, a whole l iterature developed, analyzing the contribution of research to industrial development, and to performance, productivity and economic growth, fi rst from mainstream economists.
T was popularized by economic historian W. R. Maclaurin from MIT in his pioneering program of research into the economics of technological change in the 1940s and 1950s (Godin, 2008).
Before Maclaurin, the term technological change appeared sporadically in the economic lite rature, together with technological (or technical) progress or advan cement, and meant the substitution of capital for labor as factors in industrial production.
In the late 1930s, the US Works Projects Administration, as part of a project on Reemployment Opportunities and Recent Change in Industrial Techniques, starte d using the term t echnological change regularly to discuss change s in employment due to te chnology.
Then in the early 1940s, Maclaurin gave the term a new m eaning concerned with the development and commercialization of new products, rath er than the use of technical processes 35 in production.
38 By the early 1950s, Maclaurin was using both the term technological change and technological innovation.
This would characterize the literature for the coming decades.
It is through evolutiona ry economics, among them J.A.
Schumpeter, that innovation really got into economics.
To Schumpeter, capitalism is creative destruction: disturbance of existing st ructures, and unceasing novelty and change (Schumpeter, 1928; 1942; 1947).
In his view , innovations are responsible for this phenomenon.
Schumpeter identified five types of innovation (Schumpeter, 1912: 66) – in fact, this classifi cation comes from D. Ricardo: 39 1) introduction of a new good; 2) introduction of a new method of production; 3) opening of a new market; 4) conquest of a new source of supply of raw materials or halfmanufactured goods; and 5) implementa tion of a new form of organization.
Part of the explanation for the use of the term innovation in the economic literature has to do with a reaction agai nst historians and against the term invention.
Following others, Schumpeter di stinguished innovation from invention.
To Schumpeter, "innovation is possible without anything we should identify as invention and invention doe s not necessarily induce i nnovation" (Schumpeter, 1939: 84).
Invention is an act of intellect ual creativity and "is without importance to economic analysis" (Schumpeter, 1939: 85), while innovation is an economic decision: a firm applying an inve ntion or adopting an invention.
40 However, it took time for the category to gain acceptan ce.
In the early 1960s , the category was still not widely accepted.
To economist F. Machlup, "we shall do better without the word innovation" (Machlup, 1962: 179).
To others, the term is in need of a more rigorous definition, because it "has come to mean all things to all men" (Ames, 1961: 371).
J. Schmookler, after having defined innovation (Schmookler, 38 Nevertheless, for many years most economists continued to focus on technological change as processes (used in production), rather than as products (for final consumption).
39 On some of Schumpeter's borrowing from the German and Austrian economic literature, see Streissler (1994) and Reinert (2002).
36 1966: 2), has never used the term but rather invention and technical change.
In the 1970s, the skepticism continued: the "use of the term innovation is counterproductive", claimed the author s of a survey conducted for the US National Science Foundation, because each individual has his or her interpretation (Roberts and Romine, 1974: 4).
41 For many years, the terms used in the economic literature were rath er invention, technological change (and its variants: technical advance and technical pr ogress) and sometimes automation.
Schumpeter is usually credited in the economic literature, particularly by evolutionary economists, as being the first theorist on technological innovation .
Certainly, Schumpeter did develop influential ideas on technological innovation as a source of business cycles, for example.
However, Schumpeter did follow the literature on technological change and the production function for defining technol ogical innovation as new combinations of means of production: innovation as change in the factors of productio n (input) to produce products (output) (Schumpeter, 1939: 87s; Lange, 1943).
Second, as Maclaurin (1953) has stated, Schumpeter never developed a theory of technological innovation.
To Schumpeter, the entrepreneur (and, in a next stag e, the large firm) is responsible for technol ogical innovation.
It is really the economic historian Maclaurin, as the very first economic theorist on technological innovation, who launc hed the economic study of industrial research and the commercialization of technological inventions (Godin, 2008).
Studying technological change in its economic dimensions was the task to which Maclaurin devoted himself entirely from the early 1940s onward.
To Maclaurin, the study of technological change is con cerned with factors responsible for the rate of technological development in i ndustry, and for conditions that are more conducive to technological pr ogress.
From historical analyses of how the process 40 Ten years earlier, the Britis h economist and civil servant Josiah Stamp made a similar distinction (Stamp, 1929; 1934).
For the distinction among German and Austrian economists prior to Schumpeter, like A.F.
Ried el, see Streissler (1994).
37 of technological change takes place, Ma claurin broke down this process into distinct and sequential steps, from fundamental research to production engineering, and then to diffusion.
Over time, authors from business schools and economists developed theories or conceptual models of technological innova tion as a process from invention to diffusion, similar to those of the sociologists (Table 2).
42 In these theories, technological innovation was de fined as a step (the ulti mate step) of a process starting with invention – and defined as commercialized innovation .
The formal definition of this comes from Maclaurin, originally as the first commercialization of a new or improved product or proce ss (Maclaurin, 1953: 105) – then as the whole process, from invention to comme rcialization to diffusion.
From the 1950s, scholars in technological innovation studies, first among them Carter and Williams (1957; 1958; 1959), then "evolutionary" economists (Freeman, 1971; 1974; SPRU, 1972; Nelson and Winter, 1982) developed these ideas further.
In referring to diffusion, the term imitation continued to be used until the 1980s in the economic literature among its most se rious students (Brozen, 1951; Mansfield, 1961; Posner, 1961; Schmookler, 1966; Ro senberg, 1976b; Mansfi eld et al., 1981; Nelson and Winter, 1982), while the term wa s no longer used by sociologists after Tarde, who turned to th e term diffusion.
However, to many economists, imitation or diffusion had a low st atus in the study of tec hnological innovation.
Then interest in diffusion (as o pposed to invention) reached economists from the 1980s onward.
A series of studies appeared suggesting that di ffusion was as important to economic progress as inventi on itself, if not more so.
41 The same diversity of opinions characterizes the responses to current surveys of innovation from national statistical bureaus.
42 The steps in the theories of Table 2 vary from psychological steps to organizational steps (development of new products) to economic steps (production and diffusion).
Management and Economists' Sequences of Technological Innovation 43 Mees (1920) Pure science, development, manufacturing Epstein (1926) Idea, sket ch, drawing, test, use Holland (1928) Pure science re search, applied research, invention, industrial research [development], industrial application, standardization, mass production Usher (1929) Elaboration of the concept, primary synthesis, critical revision 44 Jewett (1932) Plan (design), control (tests), preliminary small-scale operation, toolmade model, large scale production Stevens (1941) Fundamental research, applie d research, test-tube or bench research, pilot plant, production (improvement, trouble-shooting, technical control of process and quality) Bichowsky (1942) Research, engineering (or development), factory (or production) Maclaurin (1947) Fundamental research, applied research, engineering development, production engineering, service engineering 45 Furnas (1948) Exploratory and fundamental research, applied research, development, production Mees and Leermakers (1950) Research, developmen t (establishment of small-scale use, pilot plant and models), adoption in manufacturing Brozen (1951a) Invention, innovation, imitation Brozen (1951b) Research, engineering development, production, service Maclaurin (1953) Pure science, invention, innovation , finance, acceptance Usher (1954, 1955) Perception of an unsatisfied need, setting of the stage, primary act of insight, critical revision and development Carter and Williams (1957) Basic research, applied research, pilot plant, development, production Enos (1958) Invention, development, application Ruttan (1959) Invention, innovation, technological change Ames (1961) Research, in vention, development, innovation Enos (1962) Invention, securing financial backing, establishing an organization, finding a plant, hiring workers, opening markets, production and distribution Machlup (1962) Basic research, inventive work, development, plant construction Scherer (1965) Invention, entrepreneurship, investment, development Schmookler (1966) Research, development, invention Mansfield (1968; 1971) Invention, innovation, diffusion Myers and Marquis (1969) Problem solving, solution, utilization, diffusion Rothwell and Robertson (1973) Idea generation, project definition, problem solving, design and development, production, marketing Utterback (1974) Generation of an idea, problem-solving or development, implementation and diffusion 43 Mees, Holland, Jewett and Stevens are "industria lists" (managers or consultants).
They appear in the list because of their "innovativeness" and/or influence on business schools and economists.
44 This was only one of Usher's descriptions of the process.
Others are: 1) technologies, consequences, adaptation; 2) discoveries and inventions, synthesis (concept, device), construction (design); 3) problem, setting of the stage, achievement (configuration).
45 The last term was added in 1949 (Maclaurin, 1949).
39 Theories combining both production (of goods) and distribution have a long history in economic t hought, from Quesnay's tableau économique to A. Smith, D. Ricardo and K. Marx, then the System of National Accounts.
From the 1940s, such theories were applied to techno logical innovation.
The most popular and influential is what came to be called the "linear model of innovation" (Godin, 2006c).
The theory suggests that technol ogical innovation starts with basic research, then goes through applied res earch, then development, and then production and diffusion.
Such an understa nding of technologi cal innovation has been very influential on science policy after 1945.
While innovation as tec hnological innovation and as commercialized innovation came to dominate the literature, othe r conceptions of innovation developed elsewhere.
The category of social innovation (or rather social invention) as such had few followers but, beginning in the 1920s, researchers have studied (institutional or) political innovation : innovation in public institutions such as schools (with P. Mort from Columbia Univ ersity as the most active researcher) and government agencies (Chapin, 1928: chapter 11; McVoy, 1940; Walker, 1969; Mohr, 1969).
46 Up to then, most innovation studies have concentrated on individuals.
Then, management and busin ess schools have de veloped the study of organizational innovation .
First, and following Schumpeter, entrepreneurial change in firms became a topic of study for which programs of research developed, for example that of A. H. Cole 's Research Center in Entrepreneurial History (1948-58) at Harvard Universi ty (Cole, 1959; Aitken, 1965).
Second, the study of innovative behaviours of organiza tions developed, such as organizational structure and management style, mainly following T. Burns and G. M. Stalker – the latter a psychologist – (Burns and Stalker, 1961; Hage and M. Aiken, 1970; Zaltman et al., 1973; Wilson, 1966).
Third, the management of research activities, which has been a concern for industrialists and manage rs since after World War I (Mees, 1920), gained 46 For a survey of early works, see Savage (1985).
40 increased attention because they contribu te to firms' performance (productivity, profits, market share).
In this context, (technological) inn ovation came to be understood as efficiency : value for money, or the output coming from investments in R&D.
Scientific and technological productivity, or the volume of discoveries and inventions coming from R&D laboratorie s, became a subject of study in its own right.
Psychologists were among the firs ts to get into this kind of study (Pelz and Andrew, 1966; Myers and Marquis, 1969).
However, it is to the management of technology (previously called the manageme nt of scientific re search), together with accounting (Anthony and Day, 1952) and research evaluation (Rubenstein, 1957; Quinn, 1959; 1960; Hodge, 1963; Horo witz, 1963; Yovits et al., 1966; Lipetz, 1965; Seiler, 1965; Dean, 1968), that we owe the study of innovation as efficiency.
Researchers began looking at the organizational climate and conditions most conductive to scientific and technol ogical productivity, a nd at the incentives required to encourage creativity .
Creativity and productivity became one.
In fact, in the 1960s creativity, a concept of psychological origins, had become a buzzword, and came to be applied to many facets of industrial research (Steiner, 1965).
47 47 Very rarely have psychologists made use of innovation as a category, except in studies of organizations (West and Rickards, 1999).
A genealogy of the concept of creativity would have to look at genius, then talent (or ability), then intelligence, then creativity.
In fact, the very early studies on imagination from the Middle Ages to the Enlightenment were psychological in kind.
However, it was only in the mid-twentieth century that psychologists themselves started studying creativity (Guilford, 1950).
The word crea tivity itself emerged at about this time, although create and creation had existed for centuries, as the literature on poetry and art attests (Tatarkiewicz, 1980; Kristeller, 1983), and creativeness emerged in 1820.
To the psychologists, "eminent men", artists, inventors and scientists, were perfect representatives of creative individuals or geniuses.
Creativity was defined here by way of measurement: measuring the attitudes of individuals and performances to test scores, but also, increasingly, counting the volume of output produced, or productivity.
Beginning with a study published under a pseudonym in the American Journal of Psychology in 1928, the period in which an individual is more productive (the "creative years" as it was called) became a serious topic of discussion (Nelson, 1928).
The most active psychologists here were A. Roe, C. W. Taylor, M. I. Stein, H. C. Lehman and W. Dennis.
Many of the studies focused on the study of creativity of personnel in organizations.
A favorite study group was scientists and engineers.
Creativity as productivity gave rise to a whole literature on the counting of scientific papers produced by scientists (Godin, 2006a).
These studies were generally funded by government departments, for example the US Office of Naval Research, the Ai r Force, NASA, the US National Institute of Health, and by industries and their associations like the US Industrial Research Institute.
Then, in the 1950s and subsequently, sociologists also got into the study of scientific productivity and its relationship to recognition and the reward system (B. N. Meltzer, D. Crane, H. Zuckerman and R. K. Merton, S. Cole and J. S. Cole, P. D. Alliso n, J. S. Long, J. S. Scott).
Let us add that the first "psychological" 41 What role did policy play in all this?
Over the twentieth century, innovation was in fact a policy-driven concept.
Psychologists, sociologists and researchers from management, business schools and economics acted as consultants to governments, a nd were concerned with offering policy recommendations for "social engineer ing", productivity and economic growth based on their theories, the more recent ones being conceptual frameworks like the knowledge-based economy, the info rmation economy, the new economy, and national innovation system (Godin, 2009c).
Ov er the last sixty years, economists, including "evolutionary" economists, have been the experts most solicited by governments.
The first among the consultin g experts and academic "think tanks" were researchers from the US National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) (Alchon, 1985) and RAND (Hounshell, 2000), 48 then the Science Policy Research Unit (SPRU) at Sussex Univ ersity, Brighton, UK, and the Policy Research in Engineering, Science and Technology (PREST) group at Manchester University, UK.
In the 1990s, centers on innovation multiplied, such as the Fraunhofer ISI in Germany and the Maas tricht Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology (MERIT) in the Netherlands.
Innovation is also a political concept in another sense.
From its very beginning in the 1960s, science policy has been concerne d with funding scie ntific research, with technological innov ation as the expected output (Godin, 2007b).
Over time, the terms used came to reflect this very first goal.
What was called science policy in the 1960s became science and technology policy in the 1970s, then innovation policy in the 1990s (Lundvall and Borras, 2005; Branscomb and Keller, 1998: chapters 5 and 18).
However, there has ne ver been a "policy for science" period, as many authors argue (OECD, 1963: 18; 1972: 37; Elzinga and Jamison.
1995), theories on technological inventors were from economic historian A. P. Usher (1929) and US patent examiner J. Rossman (1931).
Rossman is also responsible for a very early survey of industrial incentives to invention (Rossman, 1935).
Rossman's book is also a good indicator of creativity as buzzword: by the third edition of his book (1964), first published in 1931, J. Rossman added Industrial Creativity to the previous title The Psychology of the Inventor .
42 only a "science for policy" one, during wh ich public research and universities were urged to contribute to t echnological innovation (Godin, 2009d).
49 Science policy has always been concerned with applying science to pub lic goals.
From its very beginning, science policy, whether imp licit or explicit, was constructed as a means to achieve social, economic and political goals.
In this quest for technological innovati on, statistics has been the best way to establish evidence.
In the academic liter ature, technological innovation began to be measured via patents in the 1910s, cu lminating in the works of economist J. Schmookler in the 1950s (Schmookler, 1966).
Then, it appeared to many that patent counts measure invention, not (commercialized) innovation.
Then expenditures devoted to R&D came to be used as a pr oxy, thanks to the systematic data collected in the then r ecently-launched survey series from the US National Science Foundation.
This practice th en spread to other countries via the so-called OECD Frascati manual (Godi n, 2005).
R&D is not a bad proxy of technological innovation in reality, since two-thirds of R&D expenditures are devoted to the D (development of new technologies) (Godin, 2006b).
Yet an official study concluded otherwise.
In 1967, the US Department of Commerce published a study, known as the Charpie Repor t, which was the first governmental survey of technological innovation per se (US Department of Commerce, 1967).
It showed that R&D does not constitute the main source of technological innovation.
In light of the literature on technological innovation from the 1980s onward (Freeman, 1994), it appears that the study was correct.
But at the time, it was criticized by economists and stat isticians (Mansfield, 1971; Stead, 1976), among other things because of the definitio ns and categories used (Kamin et al, 1982) and because the numbers on which the study relied were "rule of thumb figures", so qualified by the authors of the study themselves.
Nevertheless, the 48 On an early publication on innovation from these two think tanks, see US National Bureau of Economic Research (1962).
49 The literature on science policy often contrasts two periods.
The first period – policy for science – was concerned with funding science for its own sake, the golden age of university funding according to many researchers, while the second period – scien ce for policy – in which we now live, is one where research is supported mainly to achieve political and socioeconomic goals 43 report was quite influential.
It contribu ted to conventionalizing a definition of innovation as technological innovati on and as a process leading to commercialized innovation.
More than twen ty years later, the OECD published the first edition of a me thodological manual for measuring innovation, known as the Oslo Manual (OECD, 1991), which used essentially the same definition as that in the Charpie Report.
The manual, now in its third edition, serves national statisticians in surveying firms and thei r innovation activities in a standardized manner.
Conclusion In its history, innovation has been broadly conceived a nd defined.
Innovation concerns any kind of novelty : artistic, scientific, technological, organizational, cultural, social or individual.
As the Am erican anthropologist O. T. Mason put it in 1895, "invention is finding out originally how to perform any specific action by some new implement, or improvement, or substance, or method (…).
Every change in human activity, made designedly and systematically, appears to be an invention" (Mason, 1895: 13- 14).
To Mason, invention "c onsists in things and institutions, mental acts involved, reward s and benefits, powers and material of nature invoked" (Mason, 1895: 7; 15).
It in cludes "not only thi ngs, but languages, institutions, aesthetic arts, philosophies, creeds, and cults" (Mason, 1895: 410).
Innovation, broadly defined, has given rise to many theories and has been recognized as a key characteris tic of the artist (S.T.
Coleri dge), the inventor (A. P. Usher), the scientist (J.-B.
David; M.J. Mulkay), 50 the entrepreneur and the firm (J.A.
Innovation has also to a certain extent b een recognized as a key characteristic of the individual – in psychology, if not in philosophy and sociology.
Some biologists even attri bute innovation to animals (Reader and 50 On a series of early papers on innovation in science covering many disciplines, see the special issue of Scientific American (1958).
44 Laland, 2003), as H. Bergon at tributed it to nature in L'Évolution créatrice, published one hundred years ago (1907).
Historical Concepti ons of Innovation 1.
Social Change Over this same history, innovation came to be defined as useful innovation.
According to the sociologist, when used and adopted, an invention becomes an innovation; to the economist, invention is innovation when comm ercialized.
Here, the focus of both sociolog ists' and economists' th eories was technological innovation.
In the collective imaginary, in public representations , in policy, and in social studies, innovation came spontaneously to be identified with technological innovation.
As sociologist E.M. Rogers put it: "the adoption of a new idea almost always entails the sale of a new product" (Rogers, 1962: 261).
Many factors contributed to this shift: the political and economic context, the industrial and consumer revolutions, the impacts of t echnologies on individuals and societies, technology as a source of economic grow th and productivity and, above all, the institutionalization of technological inve ntion via patent laws, and industrial development through R&D laboratories.
To many, innovation thus became an industrial and economic affair.
Th e innovation surveys conducted by 51 And organizational innovation.
45 governments, of which the OECD Oslo Manu al is the emblem, ar e witness to this orientation: the measurement of inno vation concerns innovation in firms only.
One observes a dialectics here between reality and langua ge.
With the changes in the world came changes in ideas and categor ies.
For example, the material culture contributed to the rise of innovation as a central category and to a representation of innovation as technological and commercialized invention.
In turn, categories, as part of representations, discourses, laws and policies, theories and statistics make events visible, bring to light novelties and changes in the world, and contribute to these changes.
Schon, innovation came to be seen as the instrument of growth, and growth as the occasion for and object of innovation (Schon, 1967: 54).
Innovation as a (widely-used) category durin g the twentieth century is witness to a certain context or era - capitalism - and to changes in political values.
As J. Farr put it, "to understand conceptual change is in large part to understand political changes" (Farr, 1989: 25).
Until early in the twentieth century, invention, ingenuity and imagination were discusse d as symbols of civilization and as attributes of geniuses, and their contribu tion to the progress of the race.
Then, the growing role of organizations in the twentie th century led to changes in values.
If there was to be increasing economic effi ciency, there had to be innovationthrough organizations and the mobilization of their employees' creative abilities.
52 Such were the discourses of managers as well as policy-makers.
Theorists from many disciplines started studying i nnovation in terms of the effects of technological innovation on th e economy and society.
To sociologists, gone was the lonely inventor as a hero or genius.
It was a myth created by past authors.
Innovation is rather a social process.
To economists, gone was invention without market value.
It is a subject for the hi storian.
To the policy-maker, gone was (or should be) research with no application.
The golden age between the state and the funding of the basic scientist, although short-lived, is finished.
Innovation as a 52 For a similar shift in context and its impact on statistics on science, see Godin (2007a).
46 category in the twentieth century expre sses precisely these political changes: a demarcation with past understandings, values and practices.
The category's previous meanings or predecessors (inve ntion, ingenuity, imagination, etc.)
came to be subsumed under "innovation", and th e creative abilities of an individual placed in the service of organizations , industrial development and economic growth.
Innovation is the last of a series of term s imagined to give meaning to modern practices.
Certainly, innovation is, to a certain extent, continuity with the past, in the sense that more often th an not it refers to technological invention.
However, it is also a break with the past: invention per se is not enough (Levitt, 1963).
In fact, many ideas and inventions fail, accordi ng to the history of technology.
There has to be use of the invention, namely innovation, in order for benefits to accrue.
This is the first aspect of th e break.
Another concerns the production of invention.
While it was the individual, or genius , who was the source of invention in previous representations, innovation places emphasis on the firm.
And there is a third aspect of the break: benefits deri ving from invention concern economics, not culture or civilization.
There are now many people trying to broa den the understanding of innovation as technological innovation.
One now hear s discourses on "social innovation", meaning either major advances in the so cial sciences (Deutsch et al., 1971; 1986), policy/institutional reform s for the betterment of society (Gabor, 1970), or solutions to social needs and proble ms, coming from the community sectors among others (Goldenberg, 2004; Mu lgan, 2007; Mulgan et al., 2007).
53 Calls for do-it-yourself innovation, user-led innovation, open innovation and "democratizing innovation" are in the sa me vein: technologic al innovation comes from many sources, not only the research laboratory, but also users (Chesbrough, 53 Recently, R. R. Nelson has re-labeled "institutions" as "social technol ogies" (Nelson, 2008; Nelson and Sampat, 2001).
Nelson's "rhetorical move" is motivated (to my mind) by his insistence on trying to persuade economists to better integrate the role of institutions in economic theories.
The term "technology" may convince eco nomists more than "institution" does.
In the 47 2003; Hippel, 2005; Flowers, 2008).
One also hears discourses on the "creative class", which includes the "bohemians" such as artists and designers (Florida, 2002), and the "creative industries", as a categ ory in need of statistical, economic and policy recognition (Bakhshi et al., 2008).
54 The OECD Oslo Manual itself, in its latest edition, has broadened th e definition of innovation to include organizational and marketing innovati on, although this is limited to firms.
However, projects are now in progress for measuring innovation in the public sectors in the near future.
The main goal of the promoters of these new ideas is ensuring that policy-makers takes account of non-technological aspects of innovation in their policy.
Whether the ideas will have an impact on the cu rrent understanding of innovation remains to be seen.
For the moment, they certain ly contribute to extending the discourses on, and the fascination w ith, innovation to more spheres of society, and mobilizing more people in the name of innovation.
1970s, S. Kuznets already was using "social technology" and "social innovation" in this sense (Kuznets, 1978).
54 On a recent tentative to introduce the term innova tion in the field of fine arts, see Oakley et al (2008).
The Vocabulary of Innovation (ACT) (SOURCE) (EFFECTS) Imitation Inspiration Culture Invention Ingenuity Civilization Discovery Curiosity Evolution Experiment/Investigation Imagination Modernity/Progress Initiative Reason (logic) Advancement Praxis /action Improvement Change Associated terms: Development Creation/Creativity originality, freedom, Revolution Production (tive) expression, will, choice Novation/Innovation opinion Novelty The following concerns TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION Art/craft Craftsman Useful Artificial Artisan Practical Project Maker Improvement Mechanics Architect Growth/Productivity Machine/Machinery Projector Performance Tool/Instrument/ Undertaker Competitiveness Device/Engine Technician Leadership Technique Engineer Benefits Technology Entrepreneur Gain Automation/Mechanization Busi ness/Industrious Output Capital/Equipment Merchant Efficiency/ Constructing/Manufacturing Labor atories Effectiveness Product/Process Power/safety/ Methods Comfort Fabricating ( fabrica)/Making Prosperity Applications Well-being/ W e a l t h Returns Employment Savings Standards (or conditions) of living Leisure 48 References Abrams, M. H. (1953), The Mirror and the Lamp: Romantic Theory and the Critical Tradition , Oxford: Oxford University Press.
(1965), Explorations in Enterprise , Cambridge (Mass.
Alchon, G. (1985), The Invisible Hand of Planning: Capitalism, Social Science, and the State in the 1920s , Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ames, E. (1961), Research, Inven tion, Development and Innovation, American Economic Review , 51 (3), pp.
Anthony, R. N., and J. S. Day (1952), Management Contro ls in Industrial Research Organizations , Boston: Harvard University Arendt, H. (1958), Condition de l'homme moderne , Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1983.
Arendt, H. (1963), On Revolution , Bungay, Suffolk: Penguin Books, 1965.
(1948), The Industrial Revolution, 1760-1830 , London: Oxford University Press (1962).
Bakhshi, H., E. McVittie and J. Simmie (2008), Creating Innovation: Do the Creative Industries Support Innov ation in the Wider Economy?
, London: National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA).
Bannet, E. (2007), Quixotes, Imita tions, and Transatlantic Genres, EighteenthCentury Studies, 40 (4), pp.
(1961), Resistance by Scie ntists to Scientific Discovery, Science, 134 (3479), September 1, pp.
Vogt and J.B. Watson (1954), Acculturation: An Exploratory Formulation, American Anthropologist , 56 (6), pp.
(1953), Innovation: the Basis of Cultural Change, New York: McGraw Hill.
Bohlen (1955), How Farm People Accept New Ideas, Cooperative Extension Service Report no.
(1960a), Roles and Innovations in Medicine, American Journal of Sociology , 65 (6), pp.
(1960b), Scientific Produc tivity and Academic Organization in Nineteenth Century Medicine, American Sociological Review , 25 (6), pp.
(1964), Scientific Growth: a Sociological View, Minerva , 2 (4), pp.
(1966), Social Factors in the Origins of a New Science: the Case of Psychology, American Sociological Review , 31 (4), pp.
Benhamou, R. (1991), Imitation in the Decora tive Arts of the Eighteenth Century, Journal of Design History , 4 (1), pp.
Beniger, J.R. (1986), The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the Information Society , Cambridge (Mass.
Bensaude-Vincent, B., and W. R. Newman (2007), The Artificial and the Natural: An Evolving Polarity , Cam bridge (Mass.
49 Berg, M. (2002), From Imitation to I nvention: Creating Commodities in Eighteenth-Century Britain, Economic History Review , LV (1), pp.
Berg, M. (1999), New Commodities, Luxuries and their Consumers in Eighteenth-Century England, in M. Berg and H. Clifford (eds.
), Consumers and Luxury: Consumer Culture in Europe, 1650-1850 , Manchester: Manchester University Press, pp.
Berg, M. (1980), The Machinery Question and the Making of Political Economy, 1815-1848, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berg, M., and H. Clifford (eds.)
(1999), Consumers and Luxury: Consumer Culture in Europe, 1650-1850 , Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Bergson, H (1907), Creative Evolution , New York: Dover, 1998.
Berk, G., and D. Galvan (2009), How Pe ople Experience and Change Institutions: a Field Guide to Creative Syncretism, Theory and Society , 38, pp.
Bernard, L. (1923), Inventio n and Social Progress, American Journal of Sociology , 29 (1), pp.
Bernstein, R. (1971), Praxis and Action: Contemporary Philosophies of Human Activity , Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Biagioli, M., and P. Galison (eds.)
(2003), Scientific Authorship: Credit and Intellectual Property in Science , New York: Routledge.
Bichowsky, F. R. (1942), Industrial Research , New York: Chemical Publishing.
Bix, A. S. (2000), Inventing Ourselves Out of J obs?
America's Debate Over Technological Unemployment, 1929-1981 , Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bock, K. (1978), Theories of Progress, De velopment, Evolution, in T. Bottomore and R. Nisbet (eds.
), A History of Sociological Analysis , New York: Basic Books, pp.
Bond, D. F. (1937), The Neo-Classical Psychology of the Imagination, English Literary History, 4 (4), pp.
Bond, D. F. (1935), Distrust of Imag ination in English Neo-Classicism, Philological Quarterly , 14 (1), pp.
(1957), Social Change: Major Problems in the Emergence of Theoretical and Research Foci, in H. Becker and A. Boskoff (eds.
), Modern Sociological Theory , New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, pp.
(1983), Evolution: the History of an Idea , Berkeley (Calif.): University of California Press.
(1989), The Invention of Progress , Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
(1993), Biology and Social Thought, 1850-1914 , Office for History of Science and Technology, Berkel ey: University of California.
(1981), The Social Basis of Scientific Discoveries , New York: Cambridge University Press.
Branscomb, L. M., and J. H. Keller (eds.)
(1998), Investing in Innovation: Creating Research and Innov ation Policy that Works , Cambridge (Mass.
Briggs, R. (1991), The Académie Royale des Sciences and the Pursuit of Utility, Past and Present , 131, pp.
(1951a), Invention, Innovation, and Imitation, American Economic Journal , May, pp.
(1951b), Research, Technology a nd Productivity, in L. R. Tripp (ed.
), Industrial Productivity , Industrial Relations Research Association, Champaign, Illinois: 25-49.
Bundy, M. W. (1930), Invention and Imagination in the Renaissance, Journal of English and German Philology, 29, pp.
Bundy, M. W. (1927), The Theory of Imagination in Classical and Medieval Thought , University of Illinois Studies in Language and Literature, 12, Urbana: Illinois.
Burns, T., and G. M. Stalker (1961), The Management of Innovation , London: Tavistock Publication.
Bury, J.B. (1932), The Idea of Progress , New York: Macmillan.
Cambrosio, A., P. Keating and M. Macken zie (1990), Scientific Practice in the Courtroom: The Construction of Sociotechnical Identities in a Biotechnology Patent Dispute, Social Problems , 37 (3), pp.
Williams (1957), Technical Progress: Factors Governing the Speed of Application of Science , London: Oxford University Press.
and B. R. Williams (1958), Investment in Innovation , London: Oxford University Press.
and B. R. Williams (1959), Science in Industry: Policy for Progress , London: Oxford University Press.
Cassirer, E. (1932), The Philosophy of the Enlightenment , Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1951.
Chandler, A.D. (1977), The Visible Hand: The Ma nagerial Revolution in American Business , Cambridge (Mass.
Chandler, A.D. (1990), Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism , Cambridge (Mass.
Chapin, F. S. (1928), Cultural Change , New York: The Century Co. Chapin, F. S. (1917), The Experimental Method and Sociology, The Scientific Monthly , pp.
Chesbrough, H. (2003), Open Innovation: the New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Clark, D. L. (1951), Imitation: Theory and Practice in Roman Rhetoric, Quarterly Journal of Speech, 37 (12), pp.
Clifford, H. (1999), Concepts of Inven tion, Identity and Imitation in the London and Provincial Metal-Working Trades, 1750-1800, Journal of Design History , 12 (3), pp.
(1969), Commonplace Theories of Art and Nature in Classical Antiquity and in the Renaissance, Journal of the History of Ideas , 30 (4), pp.
Cobb, C. W., and P. H. Douglas (1928), A Theory of Production, American Economic Review , 18, March, pp.
(1956), Francis Bacon and the Rise of the Mechanical Arts in Eighteenth-Century England, Annals of Science , 12 (2): 137-156.
(1952), Orthodoxy and Scientific Progress, Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society , 96 (5): 505-12.
(1985), Revolution in Science , Cambridge (Mass.
Levinthal (1990), Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation, Administrative Science Quarterly , 35, pp.
Cole, A. H. (1959), Business Enterprise in its Social Setting , Cambridge (Mass.
(1995), Titan and th e Idea of Originality in the Renaissance, in A. Ladis (ed.
), Craft of Art, Athens: University of Georgia Press.
Coleman, D.C. (1992), Myth, History and the Industrial Revolution, London: Hambledon Press.
(2007), Matters of Exchange: Commerce, Medicine, and Science in the Dutch Golden Age, New Haven: Yale University Press.
), (1991a), Patents and Invention, Technology and Culture , 32 (4), special issue.
(1991b), Social Construc tion of Invention through Patent Management: Thomas Blanchar d's Woodworking Machinery, Technology and Culture, 32 (4), pp.
Costa-Lima, L. (1988), Control of the Imaginary: Reason and Imagination in Modern Times , Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Crane, D. (1972), Invisible College: Diffusion of Knowledge in Scientific Communities , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Crombie, A.C. (1975), Some Attitudes to Scientific Progress: Ancient, Medieval and Early Modern, History of Science , 13, pp.
Crombie, A.C. (1994), Styles of Scientific Thinking in the European Tradition , London: Duckworth.
Daston, L. (1995), Curiosity in Early Modern Science, Word & Image , 11 (4), pp.
Daston, L., and K. Park (1998), Wonders and the Order of Nature, 1150-1750 , New York: Zone Books.
Daston, L., and F. Vidal (2004), The Moral Authority of Nature , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(1940), Technicways in American Civilization: Notes on a Method of Measuring Their Point of Origin, Social Forces , 18 (3), pp.
Dean, B.V. (1968), Evaluating, Selecting, and Controlling R&D Projects , New York: American Management Association.
Deutsch, K.W., A.S. Markovi ts and J. Platt (1986), Advances in the Social Sciences, 1900-1980: What, Who, Where, How , Cambridge (Mass.
Deutsch, K.W., J. Platt and D. Senghaas (1971), Conditions Favoring Major Advances in Social Science, Science , 171 (3970), February 5, pp.
Dresbeck, L. (1979), Techne, Labor and Natura: Ideas and Active Life in the Medieval Winter, Studies in Medieval and Renaissance History , 2, pp.
52 Douglas, P. H. (1948), Are There Laws of Production?, American Economic Review , 38, March, pp.
Dubin, R. (1959), Deviant Behavior and Soci al Structure: Conti nuities in Social Theory, American Sociol ogical Review , 24 (2): 147-164.
Dumont, L. (1977), From Mandeville to Marx: th e Genesis and Triumph of Economic Ideology, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Eamon, W. (1994), Science and the Secrets of Nature: Books of Secrets in Medieval and Early Modern Culture , Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Eamon, W. (1983), Technol ogy as Magic in the Late Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Janus , 70, pp.
(1973), Tradition, Change, and Modernity , Malabar (FL): Krieger.
Elias, N. (1993), Mozart: Portrait of a Genius , Cambridge: Polity Press.
Elzinga, A., and A. Jamison (1995), Cha nging Policy Agenda in Science and Technology, in S. Jasanoff et al.
), Handbook of Science and Technology Studies , Thousand Oaks (Calif.): Sage, pp.
(1981), The Creative Imagination: Enlightenment to Romanticism , Cambridge (Mass.
Enos, J. L. (1958), A Measure of the Rate of Technological Progress in the Petroleum Refining Industry, Journal of Industrial Economics , 6 (3), pp.
Enos, J. L. (1962), Invention and Innovati on in the Petroleum Refining Industry, in US National Bureau of Economic Research (1962), The Rate and Direction of Inventiv e Activity: Economic and Social Factors , Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.
Epstein, R. C. (1926), Industrial In vention: Heroic, or Systematic?, The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 40 (2), pp.
Epstein, S. R. (1998), Craf t Guilds, Apprenticeship, and Technological Change in Preindustrial Europe, Journal of Economic History, 58, pp.
(1897), Des soci étés animales: étude de psychologie comparée, New York: G. E. Stechert & Co., 1924.
(1989), Understanding Conceptual Change Politically, in T. Ball, J. Farr and R. L. Hanson (eds.
), Political Innovation and Conceptual Change, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
Findlen, P. (1994), Possessing Nature: Museums, Collecting, and Scientific Culture in Early Modern Italy , Berkeley: University of California Press.
Florida, R. (2002), The Rise of the Creative Class , New York: Basic Books.
Flowers, S. (2008), The New Inventors: How Users are Changing the Rules of Innovation , London: National Endowment fo r Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA).
Force, P. (2005), Innovatio n as Spiritual Exercise : Montaigne and Pascal, Journal of the History of Ideas , 66 (1), pp.
Foucault, M. (1969), L'Archéologie du savoir , P aris: Gallimard.
Foucault, M. (1984), Nietzsche, Genealogy, History, in P. Rabinow (ed.
), The Foucault Reader , 1984, pp.
53 Freeman, C. (1994), The Economi cs of Technical Change, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 18, pp.
Freeman, C. (1974), The Economics of Industrial Innovation , London: Penguin.
Freeman, C. (1971) The Role of Small Firms in Innovation in the United Kingdom .
Report to the Bolton Committee of Enquiry on Small Firms, London: HSMO.
Ka rlsson (1997), A Novel Paradigm, Nature, 385, 6 February, p. 480.
Frison, G. (1993), Linnaeus, Beckmann, Marx and the Foundation of Technology, History and Technology , 10, pp.
Frison, G. (1992), Smith, Marx and Beck mann: Division of Labour, Technology and Innovation, in H.-P. Muller and U. Troitzsch (eds.
), Technologie: Zwischen Fortschritt und Tradition, Beitrage zum Internationalen Johan Beckmann-Symposium , Frankfurt: Am Main P. Lang, pp., 17-40.
(1948), Research in Industry: Its Organization and Management , Princeton: D. Van Nostrand.
Gabor, D. (1970), Innovations: Scientific , Technological and Social , Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gilfillan, S. C. (1952), The Pred iction of Technical Change, Review of Economics and Statistics , 34 (4), pp.
Gilfillan, S. C. (1937), The Prediction of Inventions, in US National Resources Committee (1937), Technological Trends and National Policy , Subcommittee on Technology, Washington, pp.
Gilfillan, S. C. (1935), The Sociology of Invention , Cambridge (Mass.
Gilfillan, S. C. (1927), Who Invented It?, Scientific Monthly , 25, pp.
(2009a), Homer G. Barnett and Culture Change: A Student of Innovation among the Anthropologists , Project on the Inte llectual History of Innovation, INRS: Montreal, Forthcoming.
(2009b), Innovation as Evil , Project on the Inte llectual History of Innovation, INRS: Montreal, Forthcoming.
(2009c), Making Science, Technology and Innovation Policy: Conceptual Frameworks as Narratives, 1945-2005, Project on the History of Statistics on Science, Technol ogy of Innovation, INRS: Montreal, Forthcoming.
(2009d), National Innovation System: The System Approach in Historical Perspective, Science, Technology and Human Values , Forthcoming.
(2009e), The Invention of Innovation: William F. Ogburn and the Use of Invention , Project on the Intellectual History of Innovation, INRS: Montreal, Forthcoming.
(2008), In the Shadow of Schu mpeter: W. Rupert Maclaurin and the Study of Technological Innovation, Minerva , 46 (3), pp.
(2007a), From Eugenics to Scientometrics: Galton, Cattell and Men of Science, Social Studies of Science , 37 (5), pp.
(2007b), Science, Accounti ng and Statistics: the Input-Output Framework, Research Policy , 36 (9), pp.
(2006a), On the Origins of Bibliometrics, Scientometrics , 68 (1), pp.
(2006b), Research and Development: How the "D" got into R&D, Science and Public Policy, 33 (1), pp.
(2006c), The Linear Model of Innovation: The Historical Construction of an Analytical Framework, Science, Technology, and Human Values , 31 (6), pp.
(2005), Measurement and Statistics on Science and Technology: 1920 to the Present, London: Routledge.
Goldenberg, M. (2004), Social Innovation in Canada , Canadian Policy Research Network, Report no.
(1913), The Princi ple of Limited Possibilities in the Development of Culture, The Journal of American Folklore, 26 (101), pp.
(2004), Intellectual Ability an d Speed of Performance: Galen to Galton, History of Science , 42 (138), pp.
(2008), Towards Respons ible Use of Cognitive Enhancing Drugs by the Healthy, Nature, 456, 11 December, pp.
Gross, A. G. (1989), The Rhetorical I nvention of Scientific Invention: the Emergence and Transformation of a Soci al Norm, in H. W. Simons (ed.
), Rhetoric in the Human Sciences , London: Sage, pp.
Guilford, J. P. (1950), Creativity, American Psychologist , 5, pp.
Guillerme, J., and J. Sebestik (1968), Les commencements de la technologie, Thalès , 12, pp.
(1999), The Social Construction of What?
Hadot, P. (2004), Le voile d'Isis: essai sur l'idée de nature , Paris: Gallimard.
Hage, J., and M. Aiken (1970), Social Change in Complex Organizations , New York: Random House.
Harris, M. (1968), The Rise of Anthropological Theory: a History of Theories of Culture, Walnut Creek (Califor nia): Altamira Press.
Harrison, P. (2001), Curiosity, Forbidde n Knowledge and the Reformation of Natural Philosophy in Early Modern England, Isis, 92, pp.
Hard, M., and A. Jamison (1998), The Intellectual Appropriation of Technology: Discourses on Modernity, 1900-1939 , Cambridge (Mass.
Hardy, W. (2006), The Origins of the Idea of the Industrial Revolution , Victoria (BC, Canada): Trafford Publishing.
Hart, H. (1931), The Technique of Social Progress , New York: Henry Holt and Co. Hart, H. (1957), Acceleration in Soci al Change, in F. R. Allen (ed.
), Technology and Social Change , New York: Appleton, pp.
Hart, H. (1959), Social Theory and Soci al Change, in L. Gross (ed.)
(1959), Symposium on Sociological Theory , New York: Harper and Row, pp.
55 Hathaway, N. (1989), Compilatio : From Plagiarism to Compiling, Viator , 20, pp.
Hicks, J. R. (1932), The Theory of Wages, London: Macmillan.
Hield, W. (1954), The Study of Change in Social Science, The British Journal of Sociology , 5 (1), pp.
Hilaire-Pérez, L. (2000), L'invention technique au siècle des Lumières, Paris: Albin Michel.
(1982), Rival Interpreta tions of Market Society: Civilizing, Destructive, or Feeble?, Journal of Economic Literature , 20, pp.
(1977), The Passions and their Interest: Political Arguments for Capitalism Before its Triumph, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
(1963), Rate Your Company's Research Productivity, Harvard Business Review , November, pp.
Holland, M. (1928), Research, Science a nd Invention, in F. W. Wile (ed.
), A Century of Industrial Progress , American Institute of the City of New York, New York: Doubleday, Doran and Co., pp.
(1963), Evaluation of the Results of Research and Development: Where We Stand, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , 10, June, pp.
Houghton, W. E. (1957), The History of Trades: its Relation to SeventeenthCentury Thought, in P. P. Wi ener and A. Noland (eds.
), Roots of Scientific Thought: A Cultural Perspective , New York: Basic Books, pp.
Houghton, W. E. (1942), The English Virtuoso in the Seventeenth Century: Part I, Journal of the History of Ideas , 3 (1), pp.
(2000), The Medium is the Message, or How Context Matters: the RAND Corporation Builds an Economics of Innovation, 1946-1962, in A. C. Hughes and T. P. Hughes (eds.
), (2000), Systems, Experts, and Computers: the System Approach in Management and Engineering, World War II and After , Cambridge (Mass.
255-310 Hudson, P. (1992), The Industrial Revolution , London: Edward Arnold.
(1983), Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880-1930, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Iliffe, R. (1992), "In the Warehouse": Priv acy, Property and Priority in the Early Royal Society, History of Science, 30, pp.
Impey, O., and A. MacGregor (eds.)
(1985), The Origins of Museums: the Cabinet of Curiosities in Sixteen th- and Seventeenth-Century Europe , North Yorkshire: House of Startus.
(1932), The Philosophy and Practical Application of Industrial Research, in M. Ross (ed.
), Profitable Practice in Industrial Research , New York: Harper, pp.
Jewkes, J., D. Sawers and R. Stillerman (1958), The Sources of Invention , London: Macmillan.
Joas, H. (1996), The Creativity of Action , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(1930), The Mercantilist Concept of Art and Ingenious Labour, Economic History , 2, pp.
56 Jones, R. F. (1936), Ancients and Moderns: A Study of the Rise of the Scientific Movement in Seventeenth-Century England , New York: Dover, 1961.
Kallen, H.M. (1930), Innovation, in E.R.A.
Seligman and A.S. Johnson (eds.
), Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences , New York: Macmillan, pp.
Kamin, J.Y., I. Bijaoui and R. Horesh (1982), Some Determinants of Cost Distributions in the Process of Technological Innovation, Research Policy , 11: pp.
Kasson, J. F. (1976), Civilizing the Machine: Tec hnology and Republican Values in America, 1776-1900, New York: Viking Press.
(1972), Mathematical Technologi es and the Growth of the Idea of Technical Progress in the Sixteen th Century, in W. Pagel (ed.
), Science, Medicine, and Society in the Renaissance: Essays to Honor Walter Pagel , New York: Science History Publications, pp.
Kemp, M. (1977), From Mimesis to Fantasia: the Quattrocento Vocabulary of Creation, Inspiration and Geni us in the Visual Arts, Viator, 8, pp.
Kneale, W. C. (1955), The Idea of Invention, Proceedings of the British Academy , 41, pp.
(1983), Cr eativity and Tradition, Journal of the History of Ideas , 44 (1), pp.
(1963), The Function of Dogma in Scientific Research, in A.C. Crombie (ed.
), Scientific Change , London: Heinemann, pp.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962), The Structure of Scientific Revolution , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1959), The Essential Tension: Tradition and Innova tion in Scientific Research, in C. W. Tayl or and F. Barron (eds.
), Scientific Creativity: Its Recognition and Development , New York: John Wiley, 1963, pp.
Kushner, E. (1980), The Concept of Invention and its Role in Renaissance Literary Theory, Neohelicon , 8 (1), pp.
Kuznets, S. (1978), Technological Innovati on and Economic Growth, reprinted in S. Kuznets (1979), Growth, Population, and Income Distribution , New York: Norton, pp.
(1943), A Note on Innovations, The Review of Economic Statistics , 25 (1), pp.
Laudan, L. (1981), Science and Hypothesis: Historical Essays on Scientific Methodology , Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Co. Lee, R. W. (1940), Ut Pictura Poesis : the Humanistic Theory of Painting, The Art Bulletin , 22 (4), pp.
Levitt, T. (1966), Innovative Imitation, Harvard Business Review , September, pp.
Levitt, T. (1963), Creativity is not Enough, Harvard Business Review , May/June, pp.
(1965), The Meausrement of Efficiency of Scientific Research , Carlisle (Mass.
Lippman, W. (1934), The Invention of I nvention, Reprinted in J.E.
), Science and Social Change , New York: Freeport, pp.
57 Lobkowicz, N. (1967), Theory and Practice: History of a Concept from Aristotle to Marx , London: University of Notre Dame.
Long, P. (2001), Openness, Secrecy, Authorship: Technical Arts and the Culture of Knowledge from Antiquity to the Renaissance , Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lovejoy, A.O (1936), The Great Chain of Being , Cambridge (Mass.
): Harvard University Press, 1964.
(1927), Nature as Aesthetic Norm, Modern Language Notes, 42 (7), pp.
Lovejoy, A.O., and G. Boas (1935), Primitivism ands Related Ideas in Antiquity , Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lubar, S. (1990), New, Useful, and Nonobvious, Invention and Technology , Summer, pp.
Lundvall, B.-A., and S. Borras (2005), Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, in J. Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery and R. R. Nelson (eds.
), The Oxford Handbook of Innovation , Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
Machlup, F. (1962), The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States , Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Maclaurin, W.R. (1947), Federal Support for Scientific Research, Harvard Business Review , Spring, pp.
Maclaurin, W. R. (1949), Invention and Innovation in the Radio Industry , New York: Macmillan.
Maclaurin, W. R. (1953), The Sequence from Invention to Innovation and its Relation to Economic Growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics 67 (1), pp.
Macleod, C. (2007), Heroes of Invention: Technology, Liberalism and British Identity, 1750-1914 , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Macleod, C. (1996), Concepts of Invent ion and the Patent Controversy in Victorian Britain, in R. Fox (ed.
), Technological Change: Methods and Themes in the History of Technology , London: Harwood Academic, pp.
Macleod, C. (1988), Inventing the Industrial Revolu tion: the English Patent System, 1660-1800, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Macleod, C., and A. Nuvolari (2006), The Pitfalls of Prosopogr aphy: Inventors in the Dictionary of National Biography, Technology and Culture , 47, pp.
Macleod, C., and J. Tann (2007), From Engineer to Scientist: Reinventing Invention in the Watt and Faraday Centenaries, 1919-1931, British Journal for the History of Science , 40 (3), pp.
Mann, E. L. (1939), The Problem of Origin ality in English Literary Criticism, 1750-1800, Philological Quarterly , 28 (2), pp.
(1971), Research and Innovation in the Modern Corporation , New York: Norton.
Mansfield, E., M. Schwartz and S. Wa gner (1981), Imitation Costs and Patents: An Empirical Study, The Economic Journal , 91, pp.
58 Mansfield, E. (1961), Technical Cha nge and the Rate of Imitation, Econometrica , 29 (4), pp.
Mansfield, E. (1971), Research and Innovation in the Modern Corporation , New York: Norton and Co. Mansfield, E. (1968), The Economics of Technological Change , New York: W. E. Norton.
Mason, O. T. (1895), The Origins of Invention: A Study of Industry Among Primitive People , Cambridge (Mass.
Mason, J. H. (2003), The Value of Creativity: the Origins and Emergence of a Modern Belief , Aldershot (Hampshire): Ashgate.
Mason, J. H. (1988), The Character of Creativity: Two Traditions, History of European Ideas, 9 (6), pp.
Marx, L. (1997), Technology: The Emergence of a Hazardous Concept, Social Research , 64 (3), pp.
Marx, L. (1994), The Idea of Technology and Postmodern Pessimism, in M. R. Smith and L. Marx (eds.
), Does Technology Drive History?
: The Dilemma of Technological Determinism , Cambridge (Mass.
Marx, L. (1987), Does Improved Technology Mean Progress?, Technology Review , January, pp.
Marx, L. (1964), The Machine and the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America , New York: Oxford University Press.
McFarland, T. (1985), Originality and Imagination , Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
McGee, D. (1995), Making Up Mind: the Early Sociology of Invention, Technology and Culture , 36 (4), pp.
McKeon, R. (1936), Literary Criticism and the Concept of Imitation in Antiquity, Modern Philology, 34 (1), pp.
(1940), Patterns of Diffusion in the United States, American Sociological Review , 5 (2), pp.
Mees, C. E. K. (1920), The Organization of Industr ial Scientific Research , New York: McGraw Hill.
A. Leermakers (1950), The Organization of Industrial Scientific Research , New York: McGraw-Hill.
Merton , R. K. (1957), Priorities in Scientific Discovery, American Sociological Review , 22 (6), pp.
Merton, R.K. (1957), Social Structure and Anomie, reprinted in R.K. Merton (1957), Social Theory and Social Structure , Glencoe: Free Press: 131-160.
Merton, R. K. (1961), Singletons and Multiples in Science, Proceedings of the American Psychological Society, 105 (5), pp.
(1969), Determinants of Innovation in Organizations, American Political Science Review , 63 (1), pp.
Morère, J.-E. (1966), Les vicissitudes du sens de technologie au début du dixneuvième siècle, Thalès, 12 (12), pp.
Mortier, R. (1982), L'originalité : une nouvelle caté gorie esthétique au siècle des lumières, Genève : Droz.
59 Mulgan, G. (2007), Social Innovation: What It Is, Why It Matters and How It Can Be Accelerated , Working Paper, Center fo r Social Entrepreneurship, Oxford: Said Business School.
(2007), In and Out of Sync: the Challenge of Growing Social Innovations , London: National Endowment fo r Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA).
Mulkay, M.J. (1975), Three Models of Scientific Development, Sociological Review , 23, pp.
Mulkay, M.J. (1972a), Conformity and Innovation in Science, Sociological Review Monograph , 18, pp.
Mulkay, M.J. (1972b), The Social Process of Innovation: a Study in the Sociology of Science, London: Macmillan.
Mulkay, M.J. (1969), Some Aspects of Cu ltural Growth in the Natural Sciences, Social Research , 36 (1), pp.22-52.
Turner (1971), Over-Production of Personnel and Innovation in Three Social Settings, Sociology , 1 (1), pp.
Mumford, L. (1934), Technics and Civilization , San Diego: Hartcourt Brace and Co., 1963.
Murray, P. (1989), Genius: the History of an Idea, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Myers, S. and D. G. Marquis (1969), Successful Industrial Innovations: A Study of Factors Underlying Innov ation in Selected Firms , NSF 69-17, Washington: National Science Foundation.
Nahm, M. C. (1956), The Artist as Creator: an Essay of Human Freedom , Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Nahm, M. C. (1947), The Theological Bac kground of the Theory of the Artist as Creator, Journal of the History of Ideas , 8 (3), pp.
Nelson, H. (1928), The Creative Years, American Journal of Psychology , 40, pp.
Nelson, R. R. (2008), What Enables Rapid Economic Progress: What Are the Needed Institutions?, Research Policy , 37, pp.
Nelson, R. R., and B. N. Sampat (2001), Making Sense of Institutions as a Factor Shaping Economic Performance, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 44, pp.
Nelson, R. R., and S. G. Winter (1982), An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change , Cambridge (Mass.
Newman, W. (2004), Promethean Ambitions: Alchemy and the Quest to Prefect Nature, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Newman, W. (1989), Technology and Alchem ical Debate in the Late Middle Ages, Isis , 80 (3), pp.
Nimkoff, M. F. (1957), Obstacles to I nnovation, in F. R. A llen et al.
), Technology and Social Change , New York: Appelton-Century Crofts, pp.
Nisbet, R.A. (1980), History of the Idea of Progress , New York: Basic Books.
Nisbet, R.A. (1969), Social Change and History: Aspects of the Western Theory of Development , London: Oxford University Press.
60 Noble, D. F. (1997), The Religion of Technology: the Divinity of Man and the Spirit of Invention , New York: Alfred D. Knopf.
(1977), America by Design: Science, Technology, and the Rise of Corporate Capitalism , Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nowotny, H. (2008), Insatiable Curiosity: Innovation in a Fragile Future , Cambridge (Mass.
Nowotny, H. (2006), The Quest for Innovation and Cultures of Technology, in H. Nowotny (ed.
), Cultures of Technology and the Quest for Innovation , New York: Berghan Books, pp.
Nye, D. E. (2003), America as Second Creation: Technology and Narratives of New Beginnings , Cambridge (Mass.
Nye, D. E. (1997), Narratives and Space: Technol ogy and the Construction of American Culture, New York: Columbia University Press.
Oakley, K., B. Sperry and Andy Pratt (2008), The Art of Innovation: How Fine Arts Graduates Contri bute to Innovation , London: National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA).
(1985), The Royal Societ y of London's History of Trades Programme: An Early Episode in Applied Science, Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London , 39 (2), pp.
(1937), Notes on the Tech nicways in Contemporary Society, American Sociological Review , 2 (3), pp.
OECD (2005), Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Innovation Data , Third Edition, Paris: OECD.
OECD (1991), OECD Proposed Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Innovation Data (Oslo Manual), DSTI/STII/IND/STP (91) 3.
OECD (1963), Science and the Policies of Government , Paris: OECD.
OECD (1972), Science, Growth and Society , Paris: OECD.
Ogburn, W. F. (1950), Social Change with Respect to Culture and Original Nature, Second edition, New York: The Viking Press.
Ogburn, W. F. (1941), Nati onal Policy and Technology, in S. M. Rosen and L. Rosen (eds.
), Technology and Society: the Influe nces of Machines in the United States , New York: Macmillan Co., pp.
Ogburn, W. F. (1922), Social Change with Respect to Culture and Original Nature, New York: The Viking Press.
Ogburn, W. F. and S. C. Gilfillan (1933), The Influence of Invention and Discovery, in Recent Social Trends in the United States , Report of the US President's Research Committee on So cial Trends, New York: McGrawHill, Volume 1.
Ogburn, W. F., and M. F. Nimkoff (1964), Sociology, Fourth edition, New York: Houghton Mifflin Co. Pareto, V. (1935), Mind and Society , New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co. Park, K. (1984), Bacon's Enchanted Glass, Isis, 75, pp.
Park, K., L. J. Daston and P. Galison (1984), Bacon, Galileo and Descartes on Imagination and Analogy, Isis, 75, pp.
Parsons, T. (1951), The Social System , New York: Free Press.
61 Pearson, G. (1970), Resistance to the Machine, in H. No wotny and H. Rose (eds.
), Counter-Movements in the Sciences , Sociology of the Sciences, Vol.
Pelz, D. C. and F. M. Andrews (1966), Scientists in Organizations: Productive Climate for Research and Development , New York: John Wiley.
Pigou, A. C. (1924), The Economics of Welfare , Second edition, London: Macmillan.
(1989), Machiavelli, Ha rrington and English Political Ideologies in the Eighteenth Century, in J.G.A.
Pocock, Politics, Language and Time: Essays on Political Thought and History , Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.
(1975), The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition , Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Poovey, M. (1998), A History of the Modern Fact: Problems of Knowledge in the Sciences of Wealth and Society , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Popplow, M. (1998), Protecti on and Promotion: Privileges for Inventions and Books of Machines in th e Early Modern Period, History of Technology , 20, pp.
(1961), Internationa l Trade and Technical Change, Oxford Economic Papers, 13, pp.
Quinn, J.B. (1959), Yardsticks for Industrial Research: The Evaluation of Research and Development Output , New York: Ronald Press Co. Quinn, J.B. (1960), How to Evaluate Research Output?, Harvard Business Review , 38, March-April, pp.
Quint, D. (1983), Origin and Originality in Renai ssance Literature: Versions of the Source , New Haven: Yale University Press.
(1967), The Invention of Inven tion, in M. Kranzberg and C. W. Pursell (eds.
), Technology in Western Civilization , vol.
1, London: Oxford University Press, pp.
(1986), The Philosophy of Luddism: the Case of England Woolen Workers, ca.
1790-1809, Technology and Culture , 27 (1), pp.
Reader, S. M., and K. N. Laland (2003), Animal Innovation, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Redlich, F. (1951), Innovation in Bu siness: A Systematic Presentation, American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 10 (3), pp.
Redfield, R., R. Linton and M.J. Herskovits (1936), Memorandum for the Study of Acculturation, American Anthropologist , 38 (1), pp.
(2002), Schumpeter in the Context of Two Canons of Economic Thought, Industry and Innovation , 9 (1-2), pp.
(2005), Technology and the Culture of Modernity in Britain and Germany, 1890-1945 , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roberts, R. E., and C. A. Romine (1974), Investment in Innovation , Report produced for the US National Science Foundation, Midwest Research Institute, Kansas City.
(1938), The Clas sification of Inventions, Review of Economic Studies , February, pp.
Rogers, E. M. (1983), Diffusion of Innovation , New York: The Free Press.
Rogers, E. M. (1962), Diffusion of Innovations , New York: The Free Press.
Rosenberg, N. (1976a), Marx as a Student of Technology, Monthly Review , JulyAugust, pp.
Rosenberg, N. (1976b), Problems in the Economist's Conceptualization of Technological Innovation, in Perspectives on Technology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
Rossi, P. (1962), Philosophy, Technology, and the Arts in the Early Modern Era , New York: Harper and Row, 1970.
Rossky, W. (1958), Imagination in the English Renaissance: Psychology and Poetic, Studies in the Renaissance , 5, pp.
(1935), Stimulating Employees to Invent, Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 27 (11), pp.
(1931), The Psychology of the Inventor , Washington: The Inventors Publishing Co. Rothwell, R., and A.B.
Robertson (1973), The Role of Communications in Technological Innovation, Research Policy , 2, pp.
Rubenstein, A.H. (1957), Looking Around, Harvard Business Review , 35 (3), pp.
Ruttan, V. W. (1959), Usher and Sc humpeter on Invention, Innovation, and Technological Change, Quarterly Journal of Economics , 73, pp.
The Issue of its Origins and Definitions, History and Technology , 1, pp.
Sarton, G. (1962), The Quest for Trut h: Scientific Progress During the Renaissance, in W.F.
Ferguson et al., Six Essays: The Renaissance , New York: Harper, pp.
(1985), Diffusion Research Traditions and the Spread of Policy Innovations in a Federal System, Publius: The Journal of Federalism , 15 (Fall): 1-27.
Schatzberg, E. (2006), Technik Comes to America: Changing Meanings of Technology Before 1930, Technology and Culture , 47, pp.
Scherer, F. M. (1965), Invention and Innovation in the Watt-Boulton Steam Engine Venture, Technology and Culture , 6, pp.
(1966), Invention and Economic Growth , Cambridge (Mass.
(1967), Technology and Change: The Impact of Invention and Innovation on American Socia l and Economic Development , New York: Delta Book.
(1912), The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle , Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1934.
(1928), The Instability of Capitalism, The Economic Journal , September, pp.
(1939), Business Cycles: A Theore tical, Historical, and Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process .
(1942), The Process of Creative Destruction, in Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Chapter 7, New York: Harper, 1962.
(1947), The Crea tive Response in Economic History, Journal of Economic History, November, pp.
Scientific American (1958), Issue on Innovation in Science, 199 (3).
(1965), Improving the Effectiveness of Research and Development, New York: McGraw Hill.
(2000), A Culture of Fact: England, 1550-1720 , Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Shils, E. (1981), Tradition , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(1988), Language and So cial Change, in J. Tully (ed.
), Meaning and Context, Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.
(1927), Culture: The Diffusion Controversy , New York: Norton and Co. Smith, L.P. (1925), Four Romantic Words, in Words and Idioms: Studies in the English Language , London: Constable, pp.
(2004), The Body of the Artisan: Art and Experience in the Scientific Revolution , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, P.H., and P. Findlen (2002), Merchants and Marvels: Commerce, Science and Arts in Early Modern Europe , London: Routledge.
Solow, R. M. (1957), Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function, Review of Economics and Statistics , 39 (August), pp.
(1992), "The Power of Im agination": Psychological Explanations in mid-Seventeenth-Century England, History of Science, 30, pp.
Spadafora, D. (1990), The Idea of Progress in Eighteenth-Century Britain , New Haven: Yale University Press.
Spencer, J. R. (1957), Ut Rhetorica Pictura, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes , 20, pp.
SPRU (1972) Success and Failure in Industrial Innovation: A Summary of Project SAPPHO .
London: Centre for the St udy of Industrial Innovation.
(1933-34), Must Scie nce Ruin Economic Progress?, The Hibbert Journal , 32, 383-399.
(1929), Invention, in Some Economic Factors in Modern Life , London: P.S.
Stead, H. (1976), The Costs of Technological Innovation, Research Policy , 5, pp.
(1965), The Creative Organization , Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(1937), Resistance to the A doption of Technological Innovations, in US National Resources Committee, Technological Trends and National Policy , Subcommittee on Technol ogy, Washington: USGPO.
(1927), Social Factors in Medical Progress , New York: Columbia University Press.
64 Stevens, R. (1941), A Report on Industr ial Research as a National Resource: Introduction, in National Research Council, Research: A National Resource (II): Industrial Research , Washington: National Re sources Planning Board.
Stewart, J. H. (1955), Theory of Culture Change, Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Stewart, L. (1992), The Rise of Public Science: Rhetoric, Technology and Natural Philosophy in Newtonian Britain, 1660-1750 , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stewart, L. (1998), A Meaning for Mach ines: Modernity, Utility, and EighteenthCentury Britain, The Journal of Modern History, 70 (2), pp.
(1994), The Influence of Garman and Austrian Economics on Joseph A. Schumpeter, in Y. Shionoya and M. Perlman (eds.
), Schumpeter in the History of Ideas , Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press, pp.
Sweezy, P.M. (1968), Karl Marx and the Industrial Revolution, in R.V.
), Events, Ideology and Economic Theory , Detroit: Wayne State University Press, pp.
Tarde, G. (1902), L'invention, moteur de l'évolution sociale, Revue internationale de sociologie, juin, pp.
Tarde, G. (1898), Les lois sociales: esquisse d'une sociologie , Le PlessisRobinson: Institut Synthélabo, 1999.
Tarde, G. (1897), L'opposition universelle: essai d'une théorie des contraires , Le Plessis-Robinson: Inst itut Synthélabo, 1999.
Tarde, G. (1895), La logique sociale , Le Plessis-Robinson: Institut Synthélabo, 1999.
Tarde, G. (1890), Les lois de l'imitation , Paris: Seuil, 2001.
Tararkiewicz, W. (1980), Creat ivity: History of the Concept, in W. Tararkiewicz (ed.
), A History of Six Ideas: An Essay in Aesthetics , Boston: Kluwer, pp.
(1979), Economic Policy and Projects , Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thorndike, L. (1957), Newness and Novelty in Seventeenth-Cen tury Science and Medicine, in P. P. Wiener and A. Naland (eds.
), Roots of Scien tific Thought: A Cultural Perspective , New York: Basic Books, pp.
Tigerstedt, E. N. (1968), The Poet as Creator: Origins of a Metaphor, Comparative Literature Studies , 5, pp.
Tonelli, G., and R. Wittkower (1968-70), Genius: Renaissance to 1770, Dictionary of the History of Ideas , volume 2, New York: Charles Scribner's Sons: 293-312.
(1884), Lectures on the Industrial Revolution in England , London: Newton Abbot (1969).
Usher, A. P. (1929), A History of Mechanical Inventions , New York: Dover, 1988.
Usher, A. P. (1954), A History of Mechanical Inventions , Revised edition, New York: McGraw Hill.
65 Usher, A. P. (1955), Technical Change a nd Capital Formation, in National Bureau of Economic Research, Capital Formation and Economic Growth , Princeton: Princeton University Pres, pp.
US Department of Commerce (1967), Technological Innovation: its Environment and Management , Washington: USGPO.
US National Bureau of Economic Research (1962), The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors , Princeton: Princeton University Press.
US National Research Council (1941), Research: A National Resource (II): Industrial Research , National Resources Planning Board, Washington: USGPO.
US National Resources Committee (1937), Technological Trends and National Policy , Subcommittee on T echnology, Washington.
Utterback, J. M. (1974), Innovation in I ndustry and the Diffusion of Technology, Science , 183 (4125), pp.
Utterback, J. M. and W. J. Abernathy (1975), A Dynamic Model of Process and Product Innovation, Omega, 3 (6), pp.
Veblen, T. (1898), Why is Economic s not an Evolutionary Science?, The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 12 (4), pp.
Zeitlin (1991), From the "Presentification" of the Invisible to the Imitation of Appearance, in J.P. Vernant and F.I.
Zeitlin, Mortals and Immortals: Collected Essays , Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.
Von Hippel, E. (2005), Democratizing Innovation, Cambridge (Mass.
(1969), The Diffusion of Innovations Among the American States, American Political Science Review , 63 (3), pp.
Watson, J.B. (1953), Four Approaches to Cultural Change: A Systematic Assessment, Social Forces , 32 (2): 137-145.
Weeks, A. D. (1932), Will There Be an Age of Social Invention?, The Scientific Monthly , 35 (4), pp.
Weintraub, E. R. (1991), Stabilizing Dynamics: Constructing Economic Knowledge , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
West, M.A., and T. Rickards (1999), I nnovation, in M.A.
Runco and S. Pritzjer (1999), Encyclopedia of Creativity , San Diego (Calif.): Academic Press, pp.
(1935), Plagiarism and Imitation during the English Renaissance , Cambridge (Mass.
White, L. (1975), Medieval Engineering and the Sociology of Knowledge, Pacific Historical Review , 44, pp.
White, L. (1971), Cultural Climates a nd Technological Advance in the Middle Ages, Viator , 2, pp.
White, L. (1962), The Act of Invention: Causes, Contexts, Continuities and Consequences, Technology and Culture , 3 (4), pp.
(1925), Science and the Modern World , Cambridge University Press, Fontana edition (1975).
66 67 Whitney, C. (1986), Francis Bacon and Modernity , New Haven: Yale University Press.
Williams, R. (1961), The Creative Mind, in The Long Revolution , London: Cox and Wyman, 1975, pp.
(1966), Innovation in Organiza tion: Notes Toward a Theory, in V.E.
), Approaches to Organizational Design , Pittsburg: Pittsburh University Press, pp.
Wittkower (1965), Imitation, Eclecticism, a nd Genius, in E. R. Wasserman (ed.
), Aspects of the Eighteenth Century , Baltimore (Maryland): Johns Hopkins University Press.
(1929), Patents fo r Scientific Discoveries, Journal of the Patent Office Society , 11, pp.
(1966), Research Program Effectiveness, Proceedings of the Conference Sponsored by the US O ffice of Naval Research, Washington, July 27-29, 1965, New York: Gordon and Breach.
Zaltman, G., R. Duncan and J. Holbek (1973), Innovations and Organizations , New York: John Wiley.
Zilsel, E. (1945), The Genesis of the Concept of Scientific Progress, Journal of the History of Ideas, 6 (3), pp.
Zilsel, E. (1926), The Origin of the Genius Concept , Tubingen, Germany.
